skewed from bare parameter data that the model can fit perfectly. In a collective fit, axesdefinea‘sloppy’model[20]. Figures1Band1Cshow the parameter set ensemble samples from all sets of pathat every model we have examined has a sloppy sensi- rametersforwhichthemodelbehaviorisconsistentwith tivity spectrum. Next we discuss some broad questions the data. Because sloppy models are very insensitive to about the relation between model predictions, collective parameter combinations that lie along sloppy directions, fits,andparametermeasurementsandseehowthesloppy the parameter set ensemble can extend very far in those properties of these models may suggest answers. directions, as illustrated schematically in Figure 2A. As aresult, individualparameterscanbeverypoorlydetermined (e.g., confidence interval indicated by Σ in Fig1 B. Consequences of Sloppiness ure 2A). Below we discuss a test of this prediction over all the models in our collection. The difficulty of extracting precise parameter values Unless one has direct interest in the kinetic constants from collective fits in systems biology modeling is well- for the underlying reactions, uncertainties in model preknown [26]. Sloppiness offersan explanationfor thisand dictionsaregenerallymoreimportantthanuncertainties predicts that it will be true even for fitting to complete in model parameters. The parameter set ensemble illus- 5 trated in Figure 2A yields large uncertainties on individual parameters, but can yield small uncertainties on predictions. Whilethefittingprocessallowstheensemble to expand along sloppy directions, the fit naturally constrains the ensemble along stiff directions, so that model behavior varies little within the ensemble, and predictions can be consequently tight. Direct parameter measurements, on the other hand, will have uncertainties that are uncorrelated with the model’sunderlyingstiffandsloppydirections. Forexample, if all parameter measurements are of the same precision, the parameter set ensemble is spherical, as illustrated in Figure 2B. For tight predictions, this ensemble must not cross many contours, so the required precision issetbythestiffestdirectionofthemodel. Consequently, high precision parameter measurements are required to yield tight predictions. Moreover, these measurements must be complete. If one parameter is known less precisely, the parameter set ensemble expands along that parameteraxis,asillustratedinFigure2C.Ifthataxisis FIG. 3: Fitting parameters to idealized data not aligned with a sloppy direction, model behavior will Shown are histograms of the relative confidence interval size Σ for each parameter in each model of our collection, after varydramaticallyacrosstheparametersetensembleand fitting 100 times as many time-series data points (each with predictionswillhavecorrespondinglylargeuncertainties. 10%uncertainty)asparameters. Inmostcasesalargenumber Below we discuss tests of both these notions, exploring ofparametersareleftwithgreaterthan100%uncertainty. (A the effects of direct parameter measurement uncertainty parameter constrained with 95% probability to lie between 1 on predictions of a particular model. and 100 would have Σ≈100.) Labels are as in Figure 1. 1. Parameter Values from Collective Fits The fact that nonlinear multiparameter models often Does the sloppiness of these models really prevent one allow a wide range of correlated parameters to fit data from extracting parameters from collective fits? Here we haslongbeenappreciated. Asoneexample,a1987paper discuss a test of this prediction using an idealized fitting by Brodersen et al. on ligand binding to hemoglobin and procedure. albumin empirically found many sets of parameters that Ourχ2measureofmodelbehaviorchange(Equation1) acceptablyfitexperimentaldata,withindividualparamcorresponds to the cost function for fitting model paeter values spanning huge ranges [13]. Our sloppy model rameters to continuous time-series data that the model perspective ([20, 21, 23], Figure 1) shows that there is a fits perfectly at parameters θ∗; Hχ2 is the corresponding deep underlying universal pattern in such least-squares Fisher information matrix (Equation 2). We used this fitting. Indeed, an analysis of the acceptable binding paidealized situation to test the prediction that collective rametersetsfromthe1987studyshowsthesamecharacfits will often poorly constrain individual parameters in teristic sloppy eigenvalue spectrum we observed in Figour collection of sloppy models. ure 1B (Supporting Text S5). Wedefinedtherelative95%confidenceintervalsizeΣ i as the ratio between parameter i at the upper and lower extremes of the interval, minus one. (A parameter value 2. Predictions from Direct Parameter Measurements constrainedafterthefittoliebetween10and1000would haveΣ≈100,whileoneconstrainedbetween1.0and1.5 would have Σ = 0.5.) We assumed 100 times as many Figures2Band2Csuggeststhatdirectparametermeadata points (each with 10% uncertainty) as the number surementsmustbebothpreciseandcompletetousefully of parameters in each model. Figure 3 shows histograms constrain predictions in sloppy systems. Here we discuss of the quadratic approximation to Σ for each parame- a test of this notion in a specific model. ter in each model after fitting such data. (See Meth- We worked with the 48-parameter growth-factorods.) For most of the models, the figure indicates that signaling model of Brown et al., shown schematically in such fitting leaves many parameters with greater than Figure4A[21]. Theparametersinthismodelwereorigi100%uncertainty(Σ>1). Indeed,evenfittingthislarge nally collectively fit to 14 time-series cell-biology experiamount of ideal data can leave many parameter values ments. Wefocusedonthismodelbecauseitisinstructive very poorly determined, as expected from the sloppiness tocompareourresultsconcerningdirectparametermeaof these models and our discussion of Figure 2A. surements with prior results from collective fitting. For 6 ouranalysis,weassumedthathypotheticaldirectparameter measurements would be centered about the original best-fit values. One important test of the model was a prediction of the time-course of ERK activity upon EGF stimulation, giveninhibitionofthePI3Kbranchofthepathway. The yellow shaded region in Figure 4B shows the uncertainty bound on this prediction