Universally Sloppy Parameter Sensitivities in Systems Biology Models Ryan N. Gutenkunst,1,∗ Joshua J. Waterfall,2 Fergal P. Casey,3 Kevin S. Brown,4 Christopher R. Myers,5 and James P. Sethna1 1Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 2Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 3UCD Conway Institute of Biomolecular & Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Belfield, Ireland 4Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 5Cornell Theory Center, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA (Dated: October 25, 2018) Quantitative computational models play an increasingly important role in modern biology. Such models typically involve many free parameters, and assigning their values is often a substantial obstacletomodeldevelopment. Directlymeasuringin vivo biochemicalparametersisdifficult,and collectivelyfittingthemtootherexperimentaldataoftenyieldslargeparameteruncertainties. Nevertheless, in earlier work we showed in a growth-factor-signaling model that collective fitting could yield well-constrained predictions, even when it left individual parameters very poorly constrained. Wealsoshowedthatthemodelhada‘sloppy’spectrumofparametersensitivities,witheigenvalues roughlyevenlydistributedovermanydecades. Hereweuseacollectionofmodelsfromtheliterature to test whether such sloppy spectra are common in systems biology. Strikingly, we find that every model we examine has a sloppy spectrum of sensitivities. We also test several consequences of this sloppiness for building predictive models. In particular, sloppiness suggests that collective fits to even large amounts of ideal time-series data will often leave many parameters poorly constrained. Testsoverourmodelcollectionareconsistentwiththissuggestion. Thisdifficultywithcollectivefits may seem to argue for direct parameter measurements, but sloppiness also implies that such measurements must be formidably precise and complete to usefully constrain many model predictions. We confirm this implication in our growth-factor-signaling model. Our results suggest that sloppy sensitivity spectra are universal in systems biology models. The prevalence of sloppiness highlights the power of collective fits and suggests that modelers should focus on predictions rather than on parameters. Non-technical Summary: Dynamic systems biol- ues may be a very inefficient route to useful models. ogy models typically involve many kinetic parameters, the quantitative determination of which has been a se- Dynamic computational models are powerful tools for rious obstacle to using these models. Previous work developingandtestinghypothesesaboutcomplexbiologshowed for a particular model that useful predictions icalsystems[1,2,3]. Ithasevenbeensuggestedthatsuch could be extracted from a fit long before the experimen- modelswillsoonreplacedatabasesastheprimarymeans tal data constrained the parameters, even to within or- for exchanging biological knowledge [4]. A major chalders of magnitude. This was attributed to a ‘sloppy’ lenge with such models, however, is that they often pospattern in the model’s parameter sensitivities; the sensi- sess tens or even hundreds of free parameters whose valtivity eigenvalues were roughly evenly spaced over many ues can significantly affect model behavior [5, 6]. While decades. Consequently, themodelbehaviordependedef- high-throughputmethodsfordiscoveringinteractionsare fectively on only a few ‘stiff’ parameter combinations. well-developed[7],high-throughputmethodsformeasurHerewestudytheconverseproblem,showingthatdirect ing biochemical parameters remain limited [8]. Furtherparametermeasurementsareveryinefficientatconstrain- more, using values measured in vitro in an in vivo aping the model’s behavior. To yield effective predictions plication may introduce substantial inaccuracies [9, 10]. such measurements must be very precise and complete; Ontheotherhand,collectivelyfittingparameters[11,12] even a single imprecise parameter often destroys predic- by optimizing the agreement between the model and tivity. We also show here that the characteristic sloppy available data often yields large parameter uncertaineigenvalue pattern is reproduced in sixteen other diverse ties [13, 14, 15]. In approaches typically more focused models from the systems biology literature. The appar- on steady-state distributions of fluxes in metabolic netent universality of sloppiness suggests that predictions works,metaboliccontrolanalysishasbeenusedtoquanfrom most models will be very fragile to single uncer- tify the sensitivity of model behavior with respect to patain parameters and that collective parameters fits can rameter variation [16], and flux-balance analysis and reoften yield tight predictions with loose parameters. To- latedtechniqueshaveprobedtherobustnessofmetabolic gethertheseresultsarguethatfocusingonparameterval- networks [17, 18]. One way to cope with the dearth of reliable parameter values is to focus on predictions that are manifestly parameter-independent [19], but these are mostly quali- ∗Electronicaddress: rng7@cornell.edu tative. An alternative is not to forsake quantitative pre7002 luJ 72 ]MQ.oib-q[ 3v9301070/oib-q:viXra 2 dictions, but to accompany them with well-founded un- sure in vivo than the values of individual parameters. certainty estimates based on an ensemble of parameter Much work has focused on optimizing experimental desets statistically drawn from all sets consistent with the sign to best constrain model parameters with collective availabledata[20]. (Uncertaintiesinthemodelstructure fits[24,25,26]. Weargueagainstthisfocusonparameter itself may be important in some cases. Here we focus on values, particularly when our understanding of a system parameter uncertainties, as they are often important on is tentative and incomplete. Concrete predictions can be their own.) extracted from models long before their parameters are Brown et al. took this approach in developing a even roughly known [21], and when a system is not alcomputational model of the well-studied growth-factor- readywell-understood,itcanbemoreprofitabletodesign signaling network in PC12 cells [21]. They collectively experimentstodirectlyimprovepredictionsofinteresting fit their model’s 48 parameters to 68 data points from systembehavior[27]ratherthantoimproveestimatesof 14 cell-biology experiments (mostly Western blots). Af- parameters. terthefit,all48parametershadlargeuncertainties;their 95%confidenceintervalseachspannedmorethanafactor of 50. Surprisingly, while fitting this modest amount of I. RESULTS datadidnottightlyconstrainanysingleparametervalue, itdidenableusefullytightquantitativepredictionsofbeA. Systems Biology Models have Sloppy havior under interventions,