uncertainty mustbeformidablypreciseandcompletetousefullycon- analysis, it would seem unnecessary to insist upon tight strain model predictions (Figure 4). prior estimates of the parameters, since they do not sigWhat causes sloppiness? (1) Fundamentally, slop- nificantly enhance model predictivity. Because the bepiness involves an extraordinarily singular coordinate havior of a sloppy model is dominated by a few stiff ditransformation in parameter space between the bare pa- rections that nonetheless involve almost all the paramrameters natural in biology (e.g., binding affinities and eters, direct parameter measurements constrain predicrate constants) and the eigenparameters controlling sys- tions much less efficiently than comparably difficult extem behavior, as discussed in [23]. Both experimental periments probing collective system behavior. interventions and biological evolution work in the bare Oursuggestionofmakingpredictionsfrommodelswith parameter space, so this parameterization is fundamen- verypoorlyknownparametersmayappeardangerous. A taltothesystem,notanartifactofthemodelingprocess. model with tens or hundreds of unmeasured parameters (2)Sloppinessdependsnotjustuponthemodel,butalso might seem completely untrustworthy; we certainly beon the data it is fit to; exhaustive experiments designed lieve that any prediction derived solely from a best-fit to decouple the system and separately measure each pa- set of parameters is of little value. Uncertainty bounds rameter will naturally not yield sloppy parameter sensi- derived from rigorous sensitivity analysis, however, distivities. (3) In biological systems fit to time-series data, tinguishthosepredictionsthatcanbetrustedfromthose Brown and Sethna [20] note that sloppiness may arise that cannot. Of course, successful fits and predictions due to under-determined systems, proximity to bifurca- may arise from models that are incorrect in significant tions,andseparationoftimeorconcentrationscales,but ways; forexample,onemodelpathwaywithadjustedpatheydoubtthatthesecanexplainallthesloppinessfound rameters may account for two parallel pathways in the in their model. Our analysis includes complete data on real system. A model that is wrong in some details all species, and hence is overdetermined. Small eigenval- may nevertheless be useful in guiding and interpreting ues near bifurcations are associated with dynamic vari- experiments. For computational modeling to be useful ables, and not the system parameters we investigate. To in incompletely understood systems, we must focus not study the effect of time and concentration scales we cal- on building the final, perfect, model with all parameters culated Hχ2 for a version of the Brown et al. model in precisely determined, but on building incomplete, tenwhichallconcentrationsandrateconstantswerescaledto tative and falsifiable models in the most expressive and one[47]. Theresultingmodelremainssloppy,witheigen- predictive fashion feasible. valuesroughlyuniformlyspanningfivedecades(Support- Giventhatdirectparametersmeasurementsdonoteffiing Text S4). (4) Motivated by simple example systems, cientlyconstrainmodelbehavior,howdowesuggestthat we have argued elsewhere that sloppiness emerges from experimentalists decide what experiment to do next? If a redundancy between the effects of different parameter the goal is to test the assumptions underlying a model, combinations[23]. Wearepresentlyinvestigatingdecom- oneshouldlookforpredictionswithtightuncertaintyespositions of parameter space into sloppy subsystems [46] timates that can be readily tested experimentally. If the andtheuseofphysicallyorbiologicallymotivatednonlin- goalistoreduceuncertaintyincrucialmodelpredictions, ear coordinate changes to remove sloppiness or motivate onemustinvokethestatisticalmethodsofoptimalexpersimpler models. These potential methods for model re- imentaldesign,whichwehavestudiedelsewhere[27]and finement,however,demandacompleteandsophisticated whichmaybeconvenientlyimplementedinmodelingenunderstandingofthesystemthatisunavailableformany vironments that incorporate sensitivity analysis (such as biological systems of current interest. SloppyCell [44]). Parameter estimation has been a serious obstacle in In our approach, the model and its parameters cansystemsbiologymodeling. Withtensofunknownparam- not be treated in isolation from the data that informed eters, a typical modeling effort might draw some values model development and parameter fitting. This compli- 8 cates the task of exchanging knowledge in the modeling parameter sets consistent with the stated parameter uncommunity. To support our approach, standards such certainties. (For each parameter θ , the logarithm of its i as SBML [43] that facilitate automated model exchange value is drawn from a normal distribution with mean willneedtobeextendedtofacilitateautomateddataex- logθ and standard deviation σ specified by desired i logθi change. Σ.) Foreachparameterset,theErktimecoursewascalEvery one of the 17 systems biology models we stud- culated, and at each timepoint the shaded regions in the ied exhibits a sloppy spectrum of parameter sensitivity figure contain the central 95% of the time courses. eigenvalues; they all span many decades roughly evenly and tend not be aligned with single parameters. This striking and apparently universal feature has important consequences for the modeling process. It suggests that D. Software modelers would be wise to try collective parameter fits andtofocusnotonthequalityoftheirparametervalues All computations were performed in the open-source but on the quality of their predictions. modeling environment SloppyCell, version 0.81 [44]. SBML files and SloppyCell scripts to reproduce all presented calculations are in Dataset S1. III. METHODS A. Hessian Computations IV. SUPPORTING INFORMATION Hχ2 can be calculated as Text S1: Stiffest Eigenvectors Hχ2 = 1 (cid:88) 1 (cid:90) Tc dy s,c (θ∗,t)dy s,c (θ∗,t) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) dt. Text S2: Effect of Other Poorly Determined Paramej,k N N T σ2 dlogθ dlogθ (cid:12) ters c s s,c c s 0 j k θ∗ Text S3: Fragility of Other Predictions (3) Second derivative terms (cid:0) d2y (θ∗,t)/dlogθ dlogθ (cid:1) Text S4: Rescaled Model of Brown et al. s,c i j might be expected, but they vanish because we evalu- TextS5: EigenvalueAnalysisofBrodersenet al.Bindate Hχ2 at θ∗. Equation 3 is convenient because the ing Studies first derivatives