have sloppy sensitivity spectra. A: Analyzing Hχ2 corresponds to approximating the surfaces of constant model behavior change (constant χ2) as ellipsoids. Thewidthofeachprincipalaxisisproportionaltooneoverthesquarerootofthecorrespondingeigenvalue. Theinnerellipsoid’s projection onto and intersection with the logθ axis are denoted P and I , respectively. 1 1 1 B:PlottedaretheeigenvaluespectraofHχ2 forourcollectionofsystemsbiologymodels. Themanydecadesgenerallyspanned indicate the ellipses have very large aspect ratio. (The spectra have each been normalized by their largest eigenvalue. Not all values are visible for all models.) C: Plotted is the spectrum of I/P for each parameter in each model in our collection. Generally very few parameters have I/P ≈1, suggesting that the ellipses are skewed from the bare parameter axes. (Not all values are visible for all models.) The models are ordered by increasing number of free parameters and are: (a) eukaryotic cell cycle [28], (b) Xenopus egg cell cycle[29],(c)eukaryoticmitosis[30],(d)genericcircadianrhythm[31],(e)nicotinicacetylcholineintra-receptordynamics[32], (f) generic kinase cascade [33], (g) Xenopus Wnt signaling [34], (h) Drosophila circadian rhythm [35], (i) rat growth-factor signaling[21],(j)Drosophilasegmentpolarity[36],(k)Drosophilacircadianrhythm[37],(l)Arabidopsiscircadianrhythm[2], (m)in silico regulatorynetwork[25],(n)humanpurinemetabolism[38],(o)E.colicarbonmetabolism[39],(p)buddingyeast cell cycle [40], (q) rat growth-factor signaling [41]. to χ2: schematicallyillustratestheseellipsoidsandsomeoftheir characteristics. (Details of calculating Hχ2 and related Hχ2 ≡ d2χ2(θ) . (2) quantities are found in Methods. Dataset S1 includes j,k dlogθ j dlogθ k Hχ2 for each model.) We took derivatives with respect to logθ to consider rel- Theprincipalaxesoftheellipsoidsaretheeigenvectors ative changes in parameter values, because biochemical ofHχ2,andthewidthoftheellipsoidsalongeachprinciparameters can have different units and widely varying palaxisisproportionaltooneoverthesquarerootofthe scales. AnalyzingHχ2 correspondstoapproximatingthe corresponding eigenvalue. The narrowest axes are called surfaces of constant model behavior deviation (as quan- ‘stiff’, and the broadest axes ‘sloppy’ [20]. The eigentified by χ2) to be N -dimensional ellipsoids, where N value spectra for the models in our collection are shown p p is the number of parameters in the model. Figure 1A in Figure 1B (each normalized by its largest eigenvalue). 4 In every case, the eigenvalues span many decades. All but one span more than 106, indicating that the sloppiest axes of the ellipsoids illustrated in Figure 1A are generally more than one thousand times as long as the stiffest axes. In each spectrum the eigenvalues are also approximately evenly spaced in their logarithm; there is nowell-definedcutoffbetween‘important’and‘unimportant’ parameter combinations. The Hessian matrix is a local quadratic approximation to the generally nonlinear χ2 function. Principal componentanalysisofextensiveMonteCarlorunsinthe Brown et al. model, however, indicates that the sloppiness revealed by Hχ2 is indicative of full nonlinear χ2 function [20]. Along with their relative widths, the degree to which theprincipalaxesoftheellipsoidsarealignedtothebare parameter axes is also important. We estimated this by comparing the ellipsoids’ intersections I with and proi jections P onto each bare parameter axis i. If I /P =1 i i i then one of the principal axes of the ellipsoids lies along bareparameterdirectioni. Figure1CplotstheI/P spectrum for each model. In general, very few axes have I/P ≈ 1; the ellipses are skewed from single parameter FIG. 2: Sloppiness and uncertainties directions. As in Figure 1A, the contours represent surfaces of constant modelbehaviordeviation. ThecloudsofpointsrepresentpaNaively, one might expect the stiff eigenvectors to emrameter set ensembles. body the most important parameters and the sloppy diA:Collectivefittingofmodelparametersnaturallyconstrains rections to embody parameter correlations that might the parameter set ensemble along stiff directions and allows suggest removable degrees of freedom, simplifying the it to expand along sloppy directions. The resulting ensemble model. Empirically, we have found that the eigenvectors may be very large, yet encompass little variation in model oftentendtoinvolvesignificantcomponentsofmanydif- behavior,yieldingsmallpredictionuncertaintiesdespitelarge ferent parameters; plots of the five stiffest eigenvectors parameter uncertainties. (Σ denotes the 95% confidence for 1 for each model are in Supporting Text S1. This is un- the value of θ .) 1 derstandable theoretically; the nearly-degenerate sloppy B: If all parameters are directly measured to the same precieigenvectorsshouldmix,andthestiffeigenvectorscanin- sion, the parameter set ensemble is spherical. The measureclude arbitrary admixtures of unimportant directions to mentprecisionrequiredforwell-constrainedpredictionsisset by the stiffest direction. a given important parameter combination. (Indeed, in C:Ifoneparameter(hereθ )isknownlesspreciselythanthe analogous random-matrix theories the eigenvectors are 2 rest, the cloud is ellipsoidal. If not aligned with a sloppy diknown to be uncorrelated random vectors [45].) While rection,thecloudwilladmitmanymodelbehaviorsandyield the relatively random eigenvectors studied here may not large prediction uncertainties. (Note that the aspect ratio of be useful in guiding model reduction, more direct explo- the real contours can be greater than 1000.) rationsofparametercorrelationshaveyieldedinteresting correlated parameter clusters [46]. Thesecharacteristicparametersensitivitiesthatevenly span many decades and are skewed from bare parameter data that the model can fit perfectly. In a collective fit, axesdefinea‘sloppy’model[20]. Figures1Band1Cshow the parameter set ensemble samples from all sets of pathat every model we have examined has a sloppy sensi- rametersforwhichthemodelbehaviorisconsistentwith tivity spectrum. Next we discuss some broad questions the data. Because sloppy models are very insensitive to about the relation between model predictions, collective parameter combinations that lie along sloppy directions, fits,andparametermeasurementsandseehowthesloppy the parameter set ensemble can extend very far in those properties of these models may suggest answers. directions, as illustrated schematically in Figure 2A. As aresult, individualparameterscanbeverypoorlydetermined (e.g., confidence interval indicated