they are often important on is tentative and incomplete. Concrete predictions can be their own.) extracted from models long before their parameters are Brown et al. took this approach in developing a even roughly known [21], and when a system is not alcomputational model of the well-studied growth-factor- readywell-understood,itcanbemoreprofitabletodesign signaling network in PC12 cells [21]. They collectively experimentstodirectlyimprovepredictionsofinteresting fit their model’s 48 parameters to 68 data points from systembehavior[27]ratherthantoimproveestimatesof 14 cell-biology experiments (mostly Western blots). Af- parameters. terthefit,all48parametershadlargeuncertainties;their 95%confidenceintervalseachspannedmorethanafactor of 50. Surprisingly, while fitting this modest amount of I. RESULTS datadidnottightlyconstrainanysingleparametervalue, itdidenableusefullytightquantitativepredictionsofbeA. Systems Biology Models have Sloppy havior under interventions, some of which were verified Sensitivity Spectra experimentally. In calculating their uncertainties, Brown et al. found Our collection of 17 systems biology models [2, 21, 25, that the quantitative behavior of their model was much 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41] more sensitive to changes in certain combinations of pawas drawn primarily from the BioModels database [42], rameters than others. Moreover, the sensitivity eigenan online repository of models encoded in the Systems values were approximately equally spaced in their logaBiology Markup Language (SBML) [43]. The collected rithm, a pattern deemed ‘sloppy’. Such sloppy sensitivimodels encompass a diverse range of biological systems, ties were subsequently seen in other multi-parameter fitincluding circadian rhythm, metabolism, and signaling. ting problems, from interatomic potentials [22] to sums Allthemodelsareformulatedassystemsofordinarydifof exponentials [23]. The fact that sloppiness arises in ferential equations, and they range from having about suchdisparatecontextssuggeststhatitmaybeaunivertentomorethantwohundredparameters. Inmostcases, sal property of nonlinear multi-parameter models. (Here theseparameterswerenotsystematicallyfitormeasured the term ‘universal’ has a technical meaning from statisin the original publication. ticalphysics,denotingasharedcommonpropertywitha Wequantifiedthechangeinmodelbehaviorasparamedeepunderlyingcause;see[23]. Universalityinthissense tersθvariedfromtheirpublishedvaluesθ∗bytheaverage doesnotimplythatallmodelsmustnecessarilysharethe squared change in molecular species time courses: property.) tee I n n s t y h s i t s em w s or b k i , ol w og e y b m eg o i d n el b s y fro em m p t i h ri e ca li l t l e y ra t t e u s r t e in , g ex s a e m ve i n n - - χ2(θ)≡ 1 (cid:88) 1 (cid:90) Tc (cid:20) y s,c (θ,t)−y s,c (θ∗,t) (cid:21)2 dt, 2N N T σ ingthesensitivityoftheirbehaviortoparameterchanges. c s s,c c 0 s Strikingly,wefindthatBrownetal’smodelisnotunique (1) in its sloppiness; every model we examine exhibits a a kind of continuous least-squares fit of parameters θ sloppy parameter sensitivity spectrum. (Thus, in the to ‘data’ simulated from published parameters θ∗. Here models we’ve examined sloppiness is also universal in y (θ,t) is the time course of molecular species s given s,c the common English sense of ubiquity.) We then study parametersθ inconditionc, andT isthe‘measurement’ c the implications of sloppiness for constraining parame- time for that condition. We took the species normalters and predictions. We argue that obtaining precise ization σ to be equal to the maximum value of species s parameter values from collective fits will remain difficult s across the conditions considered; other consistent noreven with extensive time-series data, because the behav- malizations yield the same qualitative conclusions. ior of a sloppy model is very insensitive to many param- For each model, the sum in Equation 1 runs over all eter combinations. We also argue that, to usefully con- molecular species in the model and (except where infeastrainmodelpredictions,directparametermeasurements sible) over all experimental conditions considered in the must be both very precise and complete, because sloppy corresponding paper—an attempt to neutrally measure modelsarealsoconverselyverysensitivetosomeparam- system behavior under conditions deemed significant by eter combinations. Tests over our collection of models theoriginalauthors. (Thetotalnumberofconditionsand support the first prediction, and detailed analysis of the species are denoted by N and N , respectively.) SBML c s model of Brown et al. supports the second contention. filesandSloppyCell[44]scriptsforallmodelsandcondiSloppiness, while not unique to biology, is particu- tions are available in Dataset S1. larly relevant to biology, because the collective behav- To analyze each model’s sensitivity to parameter variior of most biological systems is much easier to mea- ation, we considered the Hessian matrix corresponding 3 FIG. 1: Parameter sensitivity spectra Subfigure A illustrates the quantities we calculate from Hχ2 , while subfigures B and C show that all the models we examined have sloppy sensitivity spectra. A: Analyzing Hχ2 corresponds to approximating the surfaces of constant model behavior change (constant χ2) as ellipsoids. Thewidthofeachprincipalaxisisproportionaltooneoverthesquarerootofthecorrespondingeigenvalue. Theinnerellipsoid’s projection onto and intersection with the logθ axis are denoted P and I , respectively. 1 1 1 B:PlottedaretheeigenvaluespectraofHχ2 forourcollectionofsystemsbiologymodels. Themanydecadesgenerallyspanned indicate the ellipses have very large aspect ratio. (The spectra have each been normalized by their largest eigenvalue. Not all values are visible for all models.) C: Plotted is the spectrum of I/P for each parameter in each model in our collection. Generally very few parameters have I/P ≈1, suggesting that the ellipses are skewed from