schematically in such fitting leaves many parameters with greater than Figure4A[21]. Theparametersinthismodelwereorigi100%uncertainty(Σ>1). Indeed,evenfittingthislarge nally collectively fit to 14 time-series cell-biology experiamount of ideal data can leave many parameter values ments. Wefocusedonthismodelbecauseitisinstructive very poorly determined, as expected from the sloppiness tocompareourresultsconcerningdirectparametermeaof these models and our discussion of Figure 2A. surements with prior results from collective fitting. For 6 ouranalysis,weassumedthathypotheticaldirectparameter measurements would be centered about the original best-fit values. One important test of the model was a prediction of the time-course of ERK activity upon EGF stimulation, giveninhibitionofthePI3Kbranchofthepathway. The yellow shaded region in Figure 4B shows the uncertainty bound on this prediction from the original collective fit, calculated by exhaustive Monte Carlo [21]. The tightnessofthispredictionisremarkableconsideringthehuge uncertainties the collective fit left in the individual parametervalues(yellowcirclesinFigure4C).Notasingle parameter was constrained to better than a factor of 50. How precise would direct parameter measurements have to be to yield as tight a prediction as the collectivefit? Forthisprediction,thePI3Kbranch(inhibited) andC3Gbranch(NGF-dependent)ofthepathwayareirrelevantinthemodel; theremainingreactionsinvolve24 parameters. To achieve the red prediction in Figure 4B, all 24 involved parameters must be measured to within a factor of plus or minus 25% (Figure 4C, red squares). Withcurrenttechniques, measuringevenasinglein vivo biochemicalparametertosuchprecisionwouldbeachallenging experiment. Such high precision is required because,asillustratedinFigure2B,themeasurementsneed to constrain the stiffest combination of model parameters. What if a single parameter is left unmeasured? For example, consider high precision measurements of 23 of the 24 involved parameters, all but the rate constant for the activation of Mek by Raf1. For this unmeasured parameter, we assumed that an informed estimate could bound it at 95% confidence to within a total range of 1000 (e.g., between 1s−1 and 1000s−1). The resulting prediction(blueinFigure4B)hasverylargeuncertainty and would likely be useless. Note that these hypothetical measurements constrain every individual parameter value more tightly than the original collective fit (blue triangles versus yellow circles in Figure 4C), yet the preFIG. 4: Parameter and prediction uncertainties diction is much less well-constrained. Neither this paA: Our example prediction is for ERK activity upon EGF rameter nor this prediction is unique. Uncertainty for stimulationgivenPI3Kinhibitioninthis48-parametermodel thispredictionislargeifanyoneofabout18ofthe24inof growth-factor-signaling in PC12 cells [21]. volved parameters is unmeasured (Supporting Text S2). B:Shadedregionsare95%confidenceintervalscalculatedvia Furthermore,otherpossiblepredictionsinthismodelare exhaustiveMonteCarloforourexamplepredictiongivenvarsimilarly fragile to single unmeasured parameters (Supious scenarios for constraining parameter values. porting Text S3). C:PlottedistherelativesizeΣofthe95%confidenceinterval for each parameter. To usefully constrain Brown et al.’s model, direct paThe scenarios represented are: (red, squares) all model pa- rameter measurements would need to be both precise rametersindividuallymeasuredtohighprecision,(blue,trian- and complete. By contrast, collective parameter fitting gles)allparameterspreciselymeasured,exceptoneestimated yielded tight predictions with only a modest number tolowprecision,(yellow,circles)allparameterscollectivelyfit of experiments. These results are expected given the to 14 real cell-biology experiments. Precisely measured indi- model’s sloppiness. vidual parameter values enable a tight prediction (B: middle redband),butevenonepoorlyknownparametercandestroy predictivepower(B:wideblueband). Incontrast,thecollecII. DISCUSSION tivefityieldsatightprediction(B:tightestyellowband)but only very loose parameter constraints (C: circles). The large parameteruncertaintiesfromthecollectivefit(C:circles)cal- ByexaminingseventeenmodelsfromthesystemsbiolculatedherebyMonteCarloarequalitativelysimilartothose ogyliterature[2, 21,25,28,29,30, 31,32,33,34,35, 36, seen in the linearized fit to idealized data (Figure 3, model (i)). (For clarity, the dashed red lines trace the boundary of the red confidence interval.) 7 37,38,39,40,41],weshowedthattheirparametersensi- fromtheliterature(possiblyfromin vitro measurements tivities all share striking common features deemed ‘slop- or different cell lines) [33, 38], set classes of constants to piness’; the sensitivity eigenvalues span many decades the same value (e.g., phosphorylation rates) [31, 32, 41], roughly evenly (Figure 1B), and tend not to be aligned and adjust key parameters to qualitatively best fit the with single parameters (Figure 1C). We argued that existing data [2, 37, 40]. In retrospect, these approaches sloppy parameter sensitivities help explain the difficulty may be successful because the models are sloppy—they of extracting precise parameter estimates from collective can be tuned to reality by adjusting one key paramefits, even from comprehensive data. Additionally, we ter per stiff direction, independently of how reliably the argued that direct parameter measurements should be other parameters are estimated. inefficient at constraining predictions from sloppy mod- Computational modeling is a potentially invaluable els. We then showed that collective parameter fits to tool for extrapolating from current experiments and discomplete time-series data do indeed yield large parame- tinguishing between models. But we cannot trust the ter uncertainties in our model collection (Figure 3). Fi- predictions of these models without testing how much nally,weconfirmedforthe48-parametersignalingmodel they depend on uncertainties in these estimated paramof Brown et al. [21] that direct parameter measurements eters. Conversely, if we insist upon a careful uncertainty mustbeformidablypreciseandcompletetousefullycon- analysis, it would seem unnecessary to insist upon tight strain model predictions (Figure 4). prior estimates of the parameters, since they do not sigWhat causes sloppiness? (1) Fundamentally, slop- nificantly enhance model predictivity. Because the bepiness involves an extraordinarily singular coordinate havior of a sloppy model is dominated by a few stiff ditransformation in parameter space between the bare pa- rections that nonetheless involve almost all the paramrameters natural in biology (e.g., binding affinities and eters, direct parameter measurements constrain predicrate constants) and the eigenparameters controlling sys- tions much less efficiently than comparably difficult extem behavior, as discussed