grouped in so-called universality classes. This analytical feature is confirmed empirically, both by the robustness of its results for a given critical point and more stunningly by the fact that very different physical systems happen to undergo the same sort of phase transitions; that is, they are associated with the same critical exponents, thus with the same symmetries. Finally, there exist fluctuations at all scales, which means, in particular, that small perturbations can lead to very large fluctuations. To conclude, the transition through a specific point of the parameters’ space, i.e., a transition between two very different kinds of behavior is associated in physics to a change of symmetries. At this point, the system has very peculiar properties and symmetries. Symmetries by dilation (by a coefficient λ as above) yield a scale invariance. This latter invariance is associated to a global determination of the system and the formation of a “structureofcoherence”. Asobservedabove, thisallowstodescribeaglobaldeterminationof local phenomena and a unity that by-passes the idea of understanding the global complexity as the sum of many local behaviors by adding more and more local, possibly hidden, variables. For some physical phenomena this theoretical framework presents peculiar and very relevant forms of “systemic unity”. 8 4 Symmetry breaking and the biological object: extended criticality We have presented a picture of the situation in physics, but what about biology? We need to propose one or several specific frameworks relevant to the unity and coherence of biological entities, because, to our knowledge, there are no formalized theories of the “organism”. Todoso, itmaybeworthwhiletolookatthesymmetrieswhichmaybeinvolved in biological theorizing. Here, the concept of symmetry is used in a more fundamental context than when used, for example, for “bauplans”, the latter being the main biological research subjet where the concept is explicitly applied. In physics, one mostly deals with fundamental or theoretical symmetries as typically given by the equations. For example, the already mentioned fundamental principle of energy conservation corresponds to a time translation symmetry in the equations of movement. This use of symmetries also justifies the soundness of empirical results: Galilean inertia is a special case of conservation of energy and it may be empirically verified. In biology, as in any science, a missing analysis of invariants may give unreliable results and data. For example, early measurements of membrane surfaces gave very different results, since their measure is not a scale invariant property: as in fractal structures, it depends on the scale of observation10. In other words, in physics, both the generality of equations and the very objectivity of measures depend on theoretical symmetries and their breakings, such as scale invariants and scale dependencies. As mentioned above, critical transitions in physics are mathematically analyzed as isolated points11. In our approach to biological processes as “extended critical transitions”, “extended” means that every point of the evolution/development space is near a critical point. More technically, the critical points form a dense12 subset of the multidimensional space of viability for the biological process. Thus, criticality is extended to the space of all pertinent parameters and observables (or phase space), within the limits of viability (tolerated temperature, pressure and time range, or whatever other parameter, say for a given animal), see Bailly, Gaill, and Mosseri (1993); Bailly and Longo (2008, 2011). In terms of symmetries, such a situation implies that biological objects (cells, multicellular organisms, species) are in a continual transition between different symmetry groups; that is, they are in transition between different phases, according to the language of condensed matter13. These phases swiftly shift between different critical points and between different physical determinations through symmetry changes. Our perspective provides an approach concerning the mathematical nature of biological objects as a limit or asymptotic case of physical states: the latter may yield the dense structure we attribute to extended criticality only by an asymptotic accumulation of critical points in a non-trivial interval of viability — a situation not considered by current physical theories. In a sense, it is the very principles grounding physical theories that we are modifying through an “actual” limit. Thus, a biological object is mathematically and 10In Weibel (1994), another “historical” example is given as for the different results that are obtained according to different experimental scales (microscope magnifications). One team evaluated the surface density of the liver’s endoplasmic reticulum at 5.7m2/cm3 the other at 10.9m2/cm3 (!). 11The Kosterlitz-Thouless transition in statistical physics presents a marginally critical interval; that is, it is a limit case between critical and not critical. It presents correlations at all scales, as critical features, but with no symmetry changes. Thus, this particular situation is not a counter-example to our statement (the essentially pointwise nature of the proper physical transitions), in view of a lack of symmetry changes that are essential to our notion of extended criticality. 12 Here, dense means that for every small volume of the