disordered phase at high temperature, where entropy dominates, and a more ordered phase, where energy dominates. These situations can be characterized by an order parameter which is 0 in the disordered phase and different from 0 in the ordered phase8. Now, in physics, the change of state, or phase transition, occurs always mathematically at a point of the parameters’ space. This point, called the critical point, is intuitively associated with a sudden change of behaviour due to a change of symmetry, and ultimately to singularities of the state functions (for example, the order parameter is non-analytical because it goes from a constant 0 to a finite quantity, by a finite change). More technically, the critical point represents a singularity in the partition function describing the system9. In the case of iron’s paramagnetic-ferromagnetic transition, this allows to deduce the divergence of some physical observables, such as magnetic susceptibility. It should be remembered that this notion of singularity, which is associated with infinite quantities at the critical point, is a core notion for physical criticality. This peculiar situation leads to a very characteristic behaviour at the critical point (Jensen 1998): 1. Correlation length tends to infinity, and follow a power law, as for continuous phase transitions (i.e., for a vector x and an observable N, if we note by < . > the average r 7The Higgs mechanism is an example of this phenomenon; in this case, the symmetry breaking in the abstract electroweak space leads in particular to different masses of bosons and as a consequence to a very short range for weak interaction and a long range for electromagnetism. 8 Here, order means low entropy (or less symmetries) and disorder means high entropy (and more symmetries, when symmetries are computed in terms of “microstates”). 9 This function is non-analytical at the critical point, which means that the usual Taylor expansions, linearizations or higher order approximations do not actually provide an increasing approximation. 7 over point r in space, then < N(r + x)N(r) > − < N(r) >2∼ (cid:107)x(cid:107)α. This is r r associated with fluctuations at all scales leading in particular to the failure of mean field approaches. Following this approach, the value of an observable at a point is given by the mean value in its neighbourhood or, more precisely, its mathematical distribution is uniform. 2. Criticalslowdown: thetimeofreturntoequilibriumofthesystemafteraperturbation tends to infinity (Suzuki, Kaneko, and Takesue 1982; Tredicce et al. 2004). 3. Scale invariance: the system has the same behavior at each scale. This property leads to fractal geometry and means that the system has a specific symmetry (scale invariance itself). 4. The determination of the system is global and no longer local. These properties are the key motivations for the biological interest of this part of physics. The global “coherence structure” that is often formed at critical transitions provides a possible understanding, or at least, an analogy for the unity of an organism (in current terminology, its “global determination or causation”). Also, power laws, so frequent in biology, are ubiquitous in critical phenomena. They are mathematically well-behaved functions (e. g. f(x) = xα) with respect to the change of scale [typically, λ is the scale change in f(λx) = λαf(x) = λαxα, a power law in α], and they yield scale symmetries. In our example, scale change just multiplies the function f by a constant λα. Now, a power law depends on a quantity without physical dimension (α in the notation above). These quantities involved in critical transitions are called critical exponents and describe how the change of scale occurs. In our terminology, they describe the properties due to the objective determination of a phase transition because they are the invariants associated with the scale symmetry. Specific analytical methods, called renormalization methods, are used to find these quantities (Delamotte 2004). These methods consist in analyzing how scale changes transform a model representing the system, and this analysis is made “asymptotically” toward large scales. One may deduce the critical exponents from the mathematical operator representing the change of scale. The key point is that a variety of models ultimately lead to the same quantities, which means that they have the same behavior at macroscopic scales. Thus, they can be grouped in so-called universality classes. This analytical feature is confirmed empirically, both by the robustness of its results for a given critical point and more stunningly by the fact that very different physical systems happen to undergo the same sort of phase transitions; that is, they are associated with the same critical exponents, thus with the same symmetries. Finally, there exist fluctuations at all scales, which means, in particular, that small perturbations can lead to very large fluctuations. To conclude, the transition through a specific point of the parameters’ space, i.e., a transition between two very different kinds of behavior