From physics to biology by extending criticality and symmetry breakings∗ Giuseppe Longo†, Maël Montévil‡ October 24, 2018 Contents 1 Introduction and summary 2 1.1 Hidden variables in biology? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 2 Symmetry and objectivation in physics 4 3 Symmetry breakings and criticality in physics 7 4 Symmetry breaking and the biological object: extended criticality 9 5 Additional characteristics of extended criticality 12 6 Conclusion 14 References 14 Abstract Symmetries play a major role in physics, in particular since the work by E. Noether and H. Weyl in the first half of last century. Herein, we briefly review their role by recalling how symmetry changes allow to conceptually move from classical to relativistic and quantum physics. We then introduce our ongoing theoretical analysis in biology and show that symmetries play a radically different role in this discipline, when compared to those in current physics. By this comparison, we stress that symmetries must be understood in relation to conservation and stability properties, as represented in the theories. We posit that the dynamics of biological organisms, in their various levels of organization, are not “just” processes, but permanent (extended, in our terminology) critical transitions and, thus, symmetry changes. Within the limits of a relative structural stability (or interval of viability), variability is at the core of these transitions. Keywords: symmetries, systems biology, critical transitions, levels of organization, hidden variables, coherent structures, downward causation. ∗Published as: G. Longo and M. Montévil. 2011a. From physics to biology by extending criticality and symmetry breakings. Systems Biology and Cancer, Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 106 (2): 340 –347. issn: 0079-6107, doi:10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2011.03.005 †Informatique, CNRS – ENS and CREA, Paris, longo@di.ens.fr, http://www.di.ens.fr/users/longo ‡Informatique, ENS and ED Frontières du vivant, Paris V, Paris 1 2102 rpA 6 ]TO.oib-q[ 2v3381.3011:viXra 1 Introduction and summary A synthetic understanding of the notion of organism requires drawing strong correlations between different levels of organization as well as between the global structure and the local phenomena within the organism. These issues should govern any systemic view on biology. Here, we sketch an approach in which the living state of matter is interpreted as a permanent “transition”, conceived as an ongoing or extended and critical transition. A large amount of very relevant work pertaining to the Theories of Criticality in physics has been successfully applied to biology (see below). The mathematical core of these theories rests upon the idea that a “phase transition,” which can be either critical or not, may be described as a point along the line where the intended control parameter runs. For example, the ferromagnetic / paramagnetic transition takes place for a precise value of the temperature, the Curie temperature. Mathematically, this is expressed by the “pointwise” value of this temperature, i.e., one mathematical point in this parameter’s space. When the temperature decreases and passes through that point, the magnetic orientation organizes along one direction and magnetism appears. When the temperature increases through that point, disorder prevails and magnetism disappears. A (phase) transition is critical when some observables, or their first or second derivatives, diverge. This corresponds to the appearance of a “coherent structure”, that is to say space and/or time correlations at all scales, which at the transition point give a “global” aspect to the new physical object. These ideas are relevant to the analysis of biological organisms. In contrast to known critical transitions in physics, biological entities should not be analyzed just as transient over a point of a phase change; instead, they permanently sustain criticality over a non-zero interval and this with respect to many control parameters (time, temperature, pressure). This represents a crucial change of perspective. First, the mathematical tools used in physics for the analysis of criticality, i.e, the renormalization methods,essentiallyusethepointwisenatureofthecriticaltransitions. Secondly,symmetries andsymmetrybreakings radicallychangewhenenlargingthemathematicallocusofcriticality from one point to a non-zero interval. These symmetry changes make a key theoretical difference with respect to the few cases in physics where the transition seems extended (see footnote 10, below). Our approach may be seen as a move from physics to biology by an analysis of the radically different symmetries and symmetry breakings at play in their respective theoretical frames. Thus, we will mostly focus on physical vs biological criticality in terms of symmetries and then apply this method to the analysis of the difference between physical and biological “objects” as well as of physical vs biological “trajectories”. Living entities are not “just” processes, but something more: they are lasting, extended critical transitions, always transient toward a continually renewed structure. In general, physical processes do not change fundamental symmetries: to the contrary, they are mostly meant to preserve them. Typically, conservation properties (of energy, of momentum) are symmetries in the equations of movement. Critical transitions