or, at most, weakly generic given that they can be interchanged only within a given population or tissue and occasionally. In general, they are not generic, and by their specificity they cannot be replaced by an artifact — structurally. In summary, in critical transitions one may consider variables depending on global processes because of the formation of coherent structures. For example, there may be functional dependencies on a network of interactions, which cannot be split into a sum of many local dependencies (local variables). Thus, the search for more variables would not take into account this fundamental property of biological systems, considered as extended critical transitions. Moreover, symmetries in physics allow to define generic objects which follow specific trajectories (the latter allowing to find invariants in terms of symmetries, which are robust regarding measurement). On the contrary, in biology, the continual symmetry changes lead to generic trajectories that remain compatible with the survival of the system. The generic/specific duality with respect to physics helped us understand this key issue, in relation to extended criticality — which is a form of “relatively stable instability.” In other words, this is stability under changes of symmetries in an interval of viability. In a sense, the biological object is also defined by its symmetries but in a very different way: it is the specific result of a history, where its dynamics is punctuated by symmetry changes. This makes it “historical” and contingent. 5 Additional characteristics of extended criticality In physics, criticality implies more than a pointwise symmetry change; that is, it requires a change on a mathematical point, as it leads to peculiar behaviors that are relevant to biology. The first of these properties is that criticality implies a global determination, instead of a simply local one. More precisely, the singularities involved in criticality lead to a change of the level of organization in a very strong sense. Also in physics, in view of the mathematical divergence of some observables, the singularities break the ability of the “down level” to provide a causal account of the phenomena and they lead to the need for a “top level” to overcome this difficulty. In mathematical physics, this upper level can be found in the renormalization operator (it is the abstract level of changing scale). In biology, instead, the upper level is the functional unity of an organism. As a result, the existence of different levels of organization is a component of our notion of extended critical transition. “Downward causation” may find the right frame of analysis in this theoretical context. The permanent reconstruction of these levels of organization is mathematically represented by the density of the critical points and by the continual change of determination (symmetry change) in the passage between these points within the interval of extended criticality. The second property is the presence of power laws which seem to be ubiquitous in biology. They appear regularly especially when regulation is concerned, such as in cardiac rhythms (Makowiec et al. 2006; Pikkujamsa et al. 1999), blood cell number regulation (Perazzo et al. 2000), blood pressure (Wagner, Nafz, and Persson 1996), in brain activities (Werner 2007), sensory cells (Camalet et al. 1999), mitochondrial networks (Aon, Cortassa, andO’Rourke2004),inecology(Soleetal.1999)andgenenetworks(Shmulevich,Kauffman, and Aldana 2005; Nykter et al. 2008). Extended critical transitions also concern the relevant lengths of local and global exchanges, the temporalities mobilized for such exchanges and biological rhythms. To summarize, the extended critical situation has at least the following characteristics (Bailly and Longo 2008, 2011): 1. A spatial volume enclosed within a semi-permeable membrane; 12 2. Correlation lengths of the order of magnitude of the greatest length of the above referred volume; 3. A metabolic activity that is far from equilibrium and irreversible, involving exchanges of energy, of matter and of entropy with the environment, as well as the production of entropy due to all these irreversible processes, see Bailly and Longo (2009); 4. An anatomo-functional structuralization into levels of organization that can be autonomous but also coupled to each other. They are “entangled” in the sense defined by Bailly and Longo (2009); Soto, Sonnenschein, and Miquel (2008). These levels are likely to be distinguished by the existence of fractal geometries (membranous or arborescent),wherethefractalgeometriescanbeconsideredasthetrace(ora“model”) of effective passages to the infinite limit of an intensive magnitude of the system (for example, local exchanges of energy15). The different levels of organization induce, and are a consequence of, the alternation of “organs” and “organisms”, such as organelles in cells, which, in turn, make up the organs in multicellular organisms. Organisms stay in an extended critical transition, while organs are partially “optimally shaped” by the exchange of physical energy and matter. For example, fractal geometries essentially manifest in organs that are also the privileged loci of endogenous rhythms (see below). Correlation lengths are manifested both in and between these levels16. Likewise, the