independent of the nature (including the mass) of the empirical object considered (Galileo’ law of gravitation). This idea together with the “principle of inertia” has been a starting point for the constitution of space and time in classical physics. More precisely, as a consequence of the analysis of inertia and gravitation, the geometry of space and time was later described by the Galilean group4. Achangeofthissymmetrygroup, forexamplebyadoptingthePoincarégroup5, canlead to a very different physical situation, that of special relativity involving massive conceptual and physical changes. The “principle of relativity” states that the fundamental laws of physics do not depend on the reference system; they are actually obtained as invariants with respect to the change of reference system. A specific speed (the speed of light in the void) appears in the equations of electromagnetism. Einstein modified Galileo’s group in order to transform this speed into an invariant of mechanics, which turned time-simultaneity into a relative notion. As a result of the role and implications of symmetries, most contemporary physical challenges lead to the search for the right symmetries and symmetry changes, such as the work aiming at the unification of relativistic and quantum theories. In moving from physics to biology we suggest here to apply a similar approach (symmetry changes). Since the 1920s, due to Noether’s theorems, symmetries lead to the mathematical intelligibility of key physical invariant quantities. For example, symmetries by time translations are associated with energy-conservation, and symmetries by space rotations are associated with the conservation of angular momentum. Thus, conservation laws and symmetries are in a profound mathematical relation. Consequently, the various properties that define an object (mass, charge, etc.) or its states (energy, momentum, angular momentum, etc.) are associated to specific symmetries which allow these quantities to be defined. Depending on the theory adopted, this conceptualization allowed to understand why certain quantities are conserved or not: for example, there is no local energy conservation in general relativity. This explicit reference to the theory adopted is required in order to produce “scientific objectivity”, independently of the arbitrary choices made by the observer, such as, the choice of time origin, the unit of measurement, etc, but relatively to the intended theory. Thus, we say that symmetries provide “objective determinations” in physics (Bailly and Longo 2011). Thesymmetriesthatdefinephysicalpropertiesallowustounderstandthephysicalobject asgeneric,whichmeansthatanytwoobjectsthathavethesamepropertiescanbeconsidered as physically identical; in a sense, they are symmetric or invariant (interchangeable) in experiments and in pertinent mathematical framework (typically, the equations describing movement). For example, for Galileo, all objects behave the same way in the case of free fall, regardless of their nature. Moreover, symmetries allow the use of the geodesic principle, whereby the local determination of trajectories leads to the determination of the full trajectory of physical objects through conservation laws. For example, the local conservation of the “tangent” (the momentum) of movement, typically yields the global “optimal” behavior of the moving object; that is, it goes along a geodesic. Thus, in 4 Symmetries form a set of transformations that have a group structure; that is, two symmetries applied successively yield a symmetry and a symmetry can be inverted. Galileo’s group is the group of transformations that allows to transform a Galilean space-time reference system into another. It is interestingtonoticethatGalileomeasuredtimebyheartbeat,abiologicalrhythm;thesubsequenttheoretical and more “physical” measurement of time were precisely provided by classical mechanics, his invention. 5 The symmetry group of a Euclidean space is the Euclidean group of automorphisms, while Poincaré’s group corresponds to the automorphisms defining Minkowski’s spaces. 5 classical or relativistic mechanics, a trajectory is unique and fully deterministic (formally determined). In quantum mechanics the evolution of the state or wave function (roughly, a probability distribution) is fully deterministic as well – and determined by Schrödinger’s equation – while measurement follows this probability distribution (and here appears the indeterministic nature of quantum mechanics). In conclusion, by symmetries, the trajectory of a generic classical or quantum physical “object” corresponds to a critical path: physical trajectories are specific. To better understand the problem of general mathematical theorizing in biology, let’s further analyze how, in physics, a concrete problem is turned into robust models and mathematics. To begin with, physicists try to choose the right theoretical framework and the relevant physical quantities (properties and states) which are constituted by proper symmetries. As a result, typically, a mathematical framework is obtained, where one can consider a generic object; in classical mechanics, a pointwise object of mass m, speed v and position x, where these quantities are generic. Now, a generic object will follow a specific trajectory determined by its invariants obtained by calculus. A measurement is then made on the experimental object to determine the quantities necessary to specify where this object is in this mathematical framework, namely, what is its mass, initial position and speed. And finally, what specific trajectory will the object follow ... at least approximately. In classical or relativistic physics, to