the infinite limit of an intensive magnitude of the system (for example, local exchanges of energy15). The different levels of organization induce, and are a consequence of, the alternation of “organs” and “organisms”, such as organelles in cells, which, in turn, make up the organs in multicellular organisms. Organisms stay in an extended critical transition, while organs are partially “optimally shaped” by the exchange of physical energy and matter. For example, fractal geometries essentially manifest in organs that are also the privileged loci of endogenous rhythms (see below). Correlation lengths are manifested both in and between these levels16. Likewise, the various biological “clocks” are coupled, and in some cases even synchronized, within and between these levels. With the purpose of providing biological temporality with a structuring of the mathematical type, we will consider two other aspects as being specific to extended criticality. • The two-dimensionality of time, proposed in (Bailly, Longo, and Montévil 2011): 1. One dimension is classical and is parametrized according to the line of real numbers limited by fertilization on one side, and death on the other. This dimension is linked to the bio-physicochemical evolution of the organism in relation to an environment. 2. The other dimension is compactified, i. e. it is parametrized on a circle. This second dimension is linked to the organism’s endogenous physiological rhythm that is manifested through numeric quantities without dimension such as the meantotalnumberofheartbeatsandrespirationsduringthelifetimeofmammals. These are the interesting interspecific invariants and they are “pure” numbers, not frequencies (they have no dimension; they are the “total number of ...”). They become frequencies (with the inverse of time as a dimension), according to theaveragelifespan. Theextradimensionisneededexactlybecausetheinvariant phenomenon is not defined by a period which has the dimension of time, but by this new invariant observable. For example, on average, the identical (invariant) 15The fractal dimension of some organs may be calculated by optimizing the purely physical exchanges within the intended topological dimension (for example, the maximization, within a volume, of surfaces for lungs,orofvolumesforthevascularsystem,West,Brown,andEnquist(1997)),anditmaybesubjectedto constraints in terms of stericity and homogeneity, as in the cases mentioned (lung, vascular system, kidney, etc). 16 The term “entanglement” in Soto, Sonnenschein, and Miquel (2008) does not correspond, of course, to the physical meaning of “quantum entanglement” as expressed by Schrödinger’s treatment of the state function and the inseparability of quantum measure, yet it may be appropriate because there is no way to isolate one of the organs mentioned above (e.g. put a brain in a flowerpot) and perform any reasonable physiological measure on it. 13 number of total heartbeats give different frequencies according to the different lifespans of an elephant or of a mouse. Moreover, the temporality of extended criticality involve protention (i.e. pre-conscious expectation) and retention (i. e. pre-conscious memory) (Longo and Montévil 2011b), which seems to lead to a breaking of conservation of information in cognition. • The confinement within a volume of a parameter space (such as temperature, pressure, etc) of n dimensions of which 3 are spatial and 2 temporal and whose measure is different from 0 (see above). 6 Conclusion Since ancient Greece (Archimedes’ principle on equilibria) up to Relativity Theory (and Noether’s and Weyl’s work) and Quantum Mechanics (from Weyl’s groups to the timecharge-parity symmetry), symmetries have provided a unified view of the principles of theoretical intelligibility in physics. We claimed here that some major challenges for the proposal of mathematical and theoretical ideas in biology depend, in principle, on the very different roles that symmetries play in biology when compared to physics. The unifying theoretical framework in biology is neither associated to invariants nor to transformations preserving invariants like in (mathematical/theoretical) physics. It focuses, instead, on the permanent change of symmetries that per se modify the analysis of the internal and external processes of life, both in ontogenesis and evolution. In a sense, variability may be considered as the main invariant of the living state of matter. In order to explain it, we proposed to consider the role played by local and global symmetry changes along extended critical transitions. In extended criticality, dynamically changing coherent structures as global entities provide an understanding of variability within a global, extended stability. The coherent structure of critical phenomena also justifies the use of variables depending on non-local effects. Thus, an explicitly systemic approach may help in avoiding the accumulation of models and previously hidden variables. In conclusion, the notion of extended criticality provides a conceptual framework, to be further mathematized, where the dynamics of symmetries and symmetry breakings provide a new, crucial role for symmetries in biology with respect to physics. Aknowledgement: We warmly thank the editors of the published version of this chapter for several and very close preliminary revisions of this conceptually difficult text. References Aon,M.A.,S.Cortassa,andB.O’Rourke.2004.Percolationandcriticalityinamitochondrial network. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 (13): 4447. doi:10.1073/ pnas.0307156101. (Cit. on p.