in their respective theoretical frames. Thus, we will mostly focus on physical vs biological criticality in terms of symmetries and then apply this method to the analysis of the difference between physical and biological “objects” as well as of physical vs biological “trajectories”. Living entities are not “just” processes, but something more: they are lasting, extended critical transitions, always transient toward a continually renewed structure. In general, physical processes do not change fundamental symmetries: to the contrary, they are mostly meant to preserve them. Typically, conservation properties (of energy, of momentum) are symmetries in the equations of movement. Critical transitions are an exception to the preservation of symmetries in physics; their “extension” radically changes the understanding ofwhatbiologicalprocessesare. Thisperspectivealsoproposesapossiblewayofovercoming a key issue in the analysis of the complexity of the living state of matter. As for the construction of physico-mathematical or computational models, it is difficult to take the global structure of an organism into consideration, with its correlations between all levels of organization and in all lengths, including the many forms of integration and regulation. Thus, the complexity of the living unity is often modeled by the stacking of many but simple elementary processes. Typically, these formal systems deal with many observables and parameters. Since the framework is classical in a physical sense, these variables are 2 local, i.e. they depend on pointwise values of the intended phase space. Instead, conceptual and mathematical dependencies in biology should be dealt with as “global” ones, where variables may depend on systemic or non-local effects. In physics, these dependencies are a relevant aspect of critical transitions, and they are even more so in biology, where criticality is extended. 1.1 Hidden variables in biology? In classical and relativistic physics, once the suitable “phase space” and the equations that mathematically determine the system are given, the knowledge of the pointwise positionmomentum of the intended object of analysis allows to describe in principle the subsequent dynamics. This is “in principle” since physical measurement, which is always approximated, may produce the phenomenon of deterministic unpredictability, in particular in the presence of non-linear mathematical determination1. Moreover, not all “forces” in the game may be known and there may be “hidden variables” (like the frictions along the trajectory of bouncing dice). Yet, these theories are deterministic and, once all pertinent variables and forces are assumed to be known, it is the epistemic lack of knowledge which yields classical randomness. Per se, a dice follows a “geodesic”. This is a unique, optimal and “critical” path, completely determined by the Hamiltonian and may be computed as an optimum of a Lagrangian functional.2. This very beautiful paradigm, which may be summarized as the “geodesic principle”, may be further grounded on symmetries by an analysis of conservation principles (see Bailly and Longo (2011) for a recent synthesis and references). Inordertocomparethissituationwithotherfieldsofphysicsandsubsequentlytobiology, we refer to the pointwise or local nature of the mathematical variables. Cantorian (and Euclidian) points are limit conceptual constructions; that is, they are the limit of a physical accesstospaceandtimebyanalwaysapproximatedmeasurement, i.e., an“arbitrarilysmall” interval. Yet, their perfect theoretical “locality” makes all classical dynamics intelligible (in principle). So, if something is unknown, one expects that by adding enough observables and/or more variables with definite values at any given time, one could increase knowledge, since the values of these observables are intrinsic and independent of the context. The situation is rather different in Quantum Mechanics. The simultaneous, perfect, pointwise knowledge of position and momentum (or energy and time) are, in principle, forbidden because indeterminacy is intrinsic to the theory. Moreover, suppose that two quanta interact and form one system and that they later separate in space. Then acquiring knowledge regarding an observable quantity by performing a measurement on one of these quanta produces an instantaneous knowledge of the value of the measurement made on the other, i.e., the two quanta are “entangled” (Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen 1935). These features of the theory have several consequences: for instance, variables cannot always be associated to separated points and quantum randomness is intrinsic (under the form of Schrödinger equation, the “determination” gives the probability to obtain a value by measurement). Within this theoretical framework, quantum randomness differs from the classical one: two interacting dice which later separate obeying independent statistics, while the probability values of an observable of two previously interacting quanta are correlated. This is the so called “violation of Bell inequalities”, which has been empirically verified repeatedlysincetheexperimentsdescribedinAspect,Grangier,andRoger(1982).Quantum 1 Moregenerally,unpredictabilitymayappearwhenthedynamicsisdeterminedbyanevolutionfunction or equations that mathematically represent “rich” interactions. Non-linearity is a possible mathematical way to express them. 2 These are mathematical operators, that is, functions acting on functions that contain all known physical information concerning the energy state of the system. 3 entanglement requires considering some phenomena as being “non-local” and unseparable by any physical measurement (“non-separability”). Since the ’30s, some have found this situation unsatisfactory and have searched