the surface density of the liver’s endoplasmic reticulum at 5.7m2/cm3 the other at 10.9m2/cm3 (!). 11The Kosterlitz-Thouless transition in statistical physics presents a marginally critical interval; that is, it is a limit case between critical and not critical. It presents correlations at all scales, as critical features, but with no symmetry changes. Thus, this particular situation is not a counter-example to our statement (the essentially pointwise nature of the proper physical transitions), in view of a lack of symmetry changes that are essential to our notion of extended criticality. 12 Here, dense means that for every small volume of the intended phase space being considered, there is a critical point in such volume. 13Thedensesetofsymmetrygroupsmaybepotentiallyinfinite,but,ofcourse,anorganism(oraspecies) explores only finitely many of them in its life span, and only viable ones. 9 fundamentally different from a physical object because it may be characterized in terms of partial but continual changes of symmetry within an interval of viability, as an extended locus of critical transitions. In particular, this mathematical view of “partial preservation throughsymmetrychanges” isawaytocharacterizethejointdynamicsofstructural stability and variability proper to life. We thus consider this characterization as a tool for the mathematical intelligibility of fundamental biological principles: the global/structural stability is crucially associated with variability. A first consequence of these permanent symmetry changes is that there are very few invariants in biology. Mathematically, invariants depend on stable symmetries. Structural stability in biology, thus, should be understood more in terms of correlations of symmetries within an interval of the extended critical transition, rather than on their identical preservation. It is clear that the bauplan and a few more properties may be “identically” preserved. Yet, in biology, theoretical invariants are continually broken by these symmetry changes. A biological object (a cell, a multicellular organism, a species) continually changes symmetries, with respect to all control parameters, including time. Each mitosis is a symmetry change because the two new cells are not identical. This variability, under the mathematical form of symmetry breaking and constitution of new symmetries, is essential both for evolution and embryogenesis. The interval of criticality is then the “space of viability” or locus of the possible structural stability. The changes of symmetries in the dense interval of criticality, which provide a mathematical understanding of biological variability, are a major challenge for theorizing. As a matteroffact, weareaccustomedtothetheoreticalstabilitywarrantedbythemathematical invariants at the core of physics. These invariants are the result of symmetries in the mathematical (equational) determination of the physical object. This lack of invariants and symmetries corresponds to the difficulties in finding equational determinations in biology14. As a further consequence of our approach, phylogenetic or ontogenetic trajectories cannot be defined by the geodesic principle, since they are not determined by invariants and their associated symmetries. These latter are continually changing in a relatively minor but extended way. Biology may be considered to be in an opposite situation with respect to physics: in contrast to physics, in biology, trajectories are generic whereas objects are specific (Bailly and Longo 2011). That is, a rat, a monkey or an elephant are the specific results of possible (generic) evolutionary trajectories of a common mammal ancestor — or each of these individuals is specific. They respectively are the result of a unique constitutive history, yet a possible or generic one (Bailly, Gaill, and Mosseri 1993; Bailly and Longo 2011). The evolutionary or ontogenetic trajectory of a cell, a multicellular organism or a species is just a possible or compatible path within the ecosystem. The genericity of the biological trajectories implies that, in contrast to what is common in physics, we cannot mathematically and a priori determine the ontogenetic and phylogenetic trajectory of a living entity be it an individual or a species. In other words, in biology, we should consider generic trajectories (or possible paths) whose only constraints are to remain compatible with the survival of the intended biological system. Thus, phylogenesis and embryogenesis are possible paths subject to various constraints, including of course the inherited structure of the dna, of the cell and the ecosystem. The specificity of the biological object, instead, is the result of critical points and of symmetry changes of the system considered along its 14In a rather naive way, some say this by observing that any (mathematized) theory in biology has a “counterexample”. This instability of the determination goes together with the “structural stability” of biological entities. This is largely due to the stabilizing role of integration and regulation effects between different levels of organization. The mathematics of extended criticality and of variants of the renormalization methods are yet to be developed. 10 past history (evolutive and ontogenetic). These constitute the specific “properties” of this object, which allow to define it. A rat, a monkey or an elephant or their species are specific and cannot be interchanged either as individuals nor as species. A living entity is