theory in biology has a “counterexample”. This instability of the determination goes together with the “structural stability” of biological entities. This is largely due to the stabilizing role of integration and regulation effects between different levels of organization. The mathematics of extended criticality and of variants of the renormalization methods are yet to be developed. 10 past history (evolutive and ontogenetic). These constitute the specific “properties” of this object, which allow to define it. A rat, a monkey or an elephant or their species are specific and cannot be interchanged either as individuals nor as species. A living entity is the result of its history and cannot be defined “generically” in terms of invariants and symmetries as it is done for physical objects. This situation has a particular meaning when we consider time translation and time reversal symmetries. In physics, time symmetries correspond to the maintaining of the system’s invariant quantities that define the geodesics, as for example, conservation of energy. In biology both symmetries are broken. In particular, evolutionary and ontogenetic paths are both irreversible and non-iteratable; there is no way to identically “rewind” nor “restart” evolution or ontogenesis. This corresponds to the breaking of time translation and reversal symmetries. In particular, this lack of time symmetries is associated with the process of individuation, understood here as the specificity of cells, organisms and species (as much as this latter notion is well defined). It is crucial to understand that time plays a key role in this framework, since the history of all the changes in symmetry are not reducible to a specific trajectory in a given space of the dynamics. Thus, The sequence of symmetry changes defines the historical contingency of a living object’s phylogenetic or ontogenetic trajectory. Biological processes are more “history based” than physical processes. Usual physical processes preserve invariants, whereas extended critical transitions are a permanent reconstruction of organization and symmetries, i.e., of invariants. This situation also points to a lack of symmetry by permutation. For example, even in a clonal population of bacteria, different bacteria are not generic, because they are in general not interchangeable, i.e., they cannot be permuted. This allows to understand biological variability in a deeper way than the usual Gaussian (or combination of Gaussians) as random distribution of a set of observables. Now, let us consider organs (and organelles). Some organs have a functional role that can be expressed in a physical framework, particularly as far as energy transfer is concerned. This functional role can lead to restrictions on the variability of the cells that constitute the organ, while the same could be said for individual organisms in populations. At least for certains aspects of their behaviour and on average, these restrictions make cells behave symmetrically. In other words, those cells behave, in part and approximately, like generic objects with specific trajectory (geodesics). They may be interchangeable, like physical objects. The simple case of cells secreting a protein such as erythropoietin (epo) under specific conditions indicate that on average, a sufficient amount of the protein must be produced, independently of the individual contribution of each cell (which become “relatively” generic). Since the result of these cells’ production is additive (linear), its regulation does not need to be sharp. Even if some cells do not produce epo there is no functional problem as long as a sufficient quantity of this protein is secreted at the tissue level. However, when cells contribute to a non-linear framework as part of an organ, the regulation may need to be sharper. This is the case, for example, for neuronal networks or for cell proliferation where non-linear effects may be very important. In the latter case, regulation by the tissue and the organism seems to hold back pathological developments, like cancer, see Sonnenschein and Soto (1999). This point of view can possibly be generalized in order to understand the robustness of development. The role of physical processes in shaping organs is crucial; for example, exchanges of energy (or matter) force/determine the optimal (geodesic) fractal structure of lungs and vascular systems. Organs in an organism may even be replaced by man-made artifacts (as for kidneys, heart, limbs, etc.). As biological entities, organisms and even cells are 11 specific or, at most, weakly generic given that they can be interchanged only within a given population or tissue and occasionally. In general, they are not generic, and by their specificity they cannot be replaced by an artifact — structurally. In summary, in critical transitions one may consider variables depending on global processes because of the formation of coherent structures. For example, there may be functional dependencies on a network of interactions, which cannot be split into a sum of many local dependencies (local variables). Thus, the search for more variables would not take into account this fundamental property of biological