typically, a mathematical framework is obtained, where one can consider a generic object; in classical mechanics, a pointwise object of mass m, speed v and position x, where these quantities are generic. Now, a generic object will follow a specific trajectory determined by its invariants obtained by calculus. A measurement is then made on the experimental object to determine the quantities necessary to specify where this object is in this mathematical framework, namely, what is its mass, initial position and speed. And finally, what specific trajectory will the object follow ... at least approximately. In classical or relativistic physics, to a specific measurement will correspond generic objects localized near the measurement due to the limited precision of this measurement. This value may have, in principle, an arbitrary high precision. In quantum mechanics, as we recalled above, the equational determination (Schroedinger’s equation) yields the dynamics of a probability law6. In classical dynamics, we face a well-known problem: the specific trajectories can either stay close or diverge very rapidly. The linear situation corresponds to the first case, whereas thesecondsituationiscalled“sensitivetoinitialconditions” (orchaotic, accordingtovarious definitions). Note that even the latter situation leads to the definition of new invariants associated to the dynamics: in other words, the attractors that have a precise geometrical structure. In both cases, these trajectories have robust properties with respect to the measurement. In quantum physics, the situation is more complex because the measurement is not deterministic. Yet, when approximations on the state function are performed, it leads to usually stable. robust statistics. In all cases, “robust” means invariant or approximately invariant in a definite mathematical sense, as concerns the measurement of states and properties of generic objects along specific trajectories. Thus, we can finally say that generic objects, which lead to a specific measurement, behave in the same way or approximately so. Notice that this property of robustness, allowed by the genericity of the object, is mandatory for the whole framework to be relevant. We insist that both genericity for objects and specificity for trajectories (geodesics) are mathematically understood in terms of symmetries. Inconclusion,inthebroadestsense,symmetriesareatthefoundationofphysics,allowing objective definitions of space and time and the constitution of objects and trajectories. In their genericity, these objects follow specific trajectories associated with invariants that are robust with respect to measurement. 6In quantum physics, “objects” do not follow trajectories in ordinary space-time, but they do it in a suitable, very abstract space, a Hilbert space (a space of mathematical functions); what “evolves” is a probability distribution. 6 3 Symmetry breakings and criticality in physics The physics of criticality is a relatively novel discipline which analyzes, typically by the renormalizationtechniques,somepeculiarphasetransitions,i.e.,statechanges(seeToulouse, Pfeuty, and Barton (1977); Binney et al. (1992)). This theoretical framework has also been applied to a possible understanding of life phenomena (see for example, Bak, Tang, and Wiesenfeld (1988); Jensen (1998), as for “self-organized criticality”; or, Kauffman (1993), as for criticality in networks). We will next move towards biology through a different insight into the symmetries in criticality. Since symmetries are at the core of the definition of the physical objects by their properties and states, a symmetry change (that is, the breaking of some symmetries and the formation of new ones) means a qualitative change of the object considered, or a change of physical object, understood as co-constituted by theory and empiricity. For example, a researchprojectincosmologyistoconsiderasingleforcetohaveexistedintheuniverseright after the big bang. Then, the four fundamental forces may have appeared by successive symmetry breakings, whereby some transformations, which were symmetries7, did not preserve the object invariance anymore. In other words, with the cooling of the universe, the system moved to a smaller symmetry group. Closer to the scale of biology, materials like water or iron were able to show different properties in different situations. Depending on the temperature and pressure, water may be a solid, a liquid, or a gas. When liquid, there is no privileged direction (the system is isotropic, that is to say symmetric by rotations), whereas ice has a crystalline structure with spatially periodic patterns. This implies that the system is no longer symmetric by continuous rotations: it has a few privileged directions determined by its crystalline structure and a smaller symmetry group. Similarly, iron can haveparamagneticbehavior(thesystemisnot)orferromagneticbehavior(itismagnetized). In most cases, one can distinguish a more disordered phase at high temperature, where entropy dominates, and a more ordered phase, where energy dominates. These situations can be characterized by an order parameter which is 0 in the disordered phase and different from 0 in the ordered phase8. Now, in physics, the change of state, or phase transition, occurs always mathematically at a point of the parameters’ space. This point, called the critical point, is intuitively associated with a sudden change of behaviour due to a change of symmetry, and ultimately to singularities of the state functions (for example, the order parameter is non-analytical because it goes from