statistics, while the probability values of an observable of two previously interacting quanta are correlated. This is the so called “violation of Bell inequalities”, which has been empirically verified repeatedlysincetheexperimentsdescribedinAspect,Grangier,andRoger(1982).Quantum 1 Moregenerally,unpredictabilitymayappearwhenthedynamicsisdeterminedbyanevolutionfunction or equations that mathematically represent “rich” interactions. Non-linearity is a possible mathematical way to express them. 2 These are mathematical operators, that is, functions acting on functions that contain all known physical information concerning the energy state of the system. 3 entanglement requires considering some phenomena as being “non-local” and unseparable by any physical measurement (“non-separability”). Since the ’30s, some have found this situation unsatisfactory and have searched for “hidden variables” like in the epistemic approach to randomness and determination of classical and relativistic physics. The idea is that these hidden variables corresponding to quantum mechanical observables have definite (pointwise/local) values at any given time, and that the values of those variables are intrinsic and independent of the device used to measure them. A robust result has instead shown that these assumptions contradict the fundamental fact that quantum mechanical observables need not be commutative (Kochen and Specker 1967). Moreover, even when assuming the existence of, or the need for, hidden variables, these would be “non-local” and thus, far from the pointwise/local dependence of set-theoretic variables. The difference between the classical and quantum frameworks has the following consequence: quantum systems may have a proper systemic unity for at least two reasons. Conjugated observables (position and momentum) are “linked” by joint indetermination. Entangled quanta remain a “system”, in the sense of their non-separability by measurement3. Can this perspective help us in biology? On technical grounds, surely not, or rather not yet. Perhaps, “entangled molecular phenomena” or “tunnel effects ... in the brain” may clarify fundamental issues in the future. However, theoretical ideas in Quantum Mechanics may at least inspire our attempts in system biology, in particular by considering the methodological role of symmetries and symmetry breakings in this area of physics. A living organism is a system. And entanglement, non locality, non-separability, superposition, whatever these concepts may mean in biology, may present themselves both at each specific level of organization and in the interactions between levels of organization. Physiological interactions among molecules, cells, tissues, organs do not simply sum each other up: they are “entangled”, “non-local”, “non-separable” ... they are “superposed” (see examples described by Noble (2006); Soto, Sonnenschein, and Miquel (2008)). Thus, the theoretical and mathematical approaches to biology cannot be based only on a continual enrichment of “local” views: mathematical models cannot work just by assuming the need for more and more variables (possibly hidden to the previous models). A global view of the system and of its symmetries is required. In this context, the differences in symmetries and their breakings will help in clarifying and facilitating the passage from physics to biology. 2 Symmetry and objectivation in physics In Physics, objectivity is obtained by the co-constitutive use of experiments and mathematized theories. So far, however, there is little mathematics for a “theory of the biological organisms” despite the large amount of data collected and of theories proposed within specific levels of organization. These include the geometric analysis of the fractal structures of lungs, of vascular systems, of various plant organs, of networks of neural cells, of tumor shapes, to name but a few. To make further progress towards mathematizing theories in biology, in particular towards theories of the “living object” or of the organism as a system, it would help first to understand how such a feat was achieved in physics. Physical theories have very general characteristics in their constitution of objectivity, and in particular in theirrelationshipwithmathematics. Inordertodefinespaceandtime, aswellastodescribe physical objects, physicists ultimately use the notion of symmetry. Physical symmetries are the transformations that do not change the intended physical aspects of a system in a theory. As we shall see, they allow to define these aspects in a non-arbitrary way. 3 Superposition should also be mentioned, see Silverman (2008). 4 Galileo’s theory provides a simple and historical example of this role of symmetries. For scholastic physics, the speed at which a body falls is proportional to the space traveled. Galileo instead proposed that it is proportional to the time of the fall and that it is independent of the nature (including the mass) of the empirical object considered (Galileo’ law of gravitation). This idea together with the “principle of inertia” has been a starting point for the constitution of space and time in classical physics. More precisely, as a consequence of the analysis of inertia and gravitation, the geometry of space and time was later described by the Galilean group4. Achangeofthissymmetrygroup, forexamplebyadoptingthePoincarégroup5, canlead to a very different physical situation, that of special relativity involving massive conceptual and physical changes. The “principle of relativity” states that the fundamental laws of physics do not depend on the reference