The Use of Information Theory in Evolutionary Biology 1,2,3 Christoph Adami 1Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics 2Department of Physics and Astronomy 3BEACON Center for the Study of Evolution in Action Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824 Abstract Information is a key concept in evolutionary biology. Information is stored in biological organism’s genomes, and used to generate the organism as well as to maintain and control it. Information is also “that which evolves”. When a population adapts to a local environment, information about this environment is fixed in a representative genome. However, when an environment changes, information can be lost. At the same time, information is processed by animal brains to survive in complex environments, and the capacity for information processing also evolves. Here I review applications of information theory to the evolution of proteins as well as to the evolution of information processing in simulated agents that adapt to perform a complex task. 1. Introduction Evolutionary biology has traditionally been a science that used observation and the analysis of specimens to draw inferences about common descent, adaptation, variation, and selection1,2. In contrast to this discipline that requires fieldwork and meticulous attention to detail stands the mathematical theory of population genetics3,4, which developed in parallel but somewhat removed from evolutionary biology, as it could treat exactly only very abstract cases. The mathematical theory cast Darwin’s insight about inheritance, variation, and selection into formulae that could predict particular aspects of the evolutionary process, such as the probability that an allele that conferred a particular advantage would go to fixation, how long this process would take, and how it would be modified by different forms of inheritance. Missing from these two disciplines, however, was a framework that would allow us to understand the broad macro-evolutionary arcs that we can see everywhere in the biosphere and in the fossil record: the lines of descent that connect simple to complex forms of life. Granted, the existence of these unbroken lines—and the fact that they are the result of the evolutionary mechanisms at work—is not in doubt. Yet, mathematical population genetics cannot quantify them because the theory only deals with existing variation. At the same time, the uniqueness of any particular line of descent appears to preclude a generative principle, or a framework that would allow us to understand the generation of these lines from a perspective once removed from the microscopic mechanisms that shape genes one mutation at the time. In the last 23 years or so, the situation has changed dramatically because of the advent of long-term evolution experiments with replicate lines of bacteria adapting for over 50,000 generations5,6, as well as in-silico evolution experiments covering millions of generations7,8. Both experimental approaches, in their own way, have provided us with key insights into the evolution of complexity on macroscopic time scales6,8-14. But there is a common concept that unifies the digital and the biochemical approach: information. That information is the essence of “that which evolves” has been implicit in many writings (although the word “information” does not appear in Darwin’s On the Origin of Species). Indeed, shortly after the genesis of the theory of information at the hands of a Bell Laboratories engineer15, this theory was thought to explain everything from the higher functions of living organisms down to metabolism, growth, and differentiation16. However, this optimism soon gave way to a miasma of confounding mathematical and philosophical arguments that dampened enthusiasm for the concept of information in biology for decades. To some extent, evolutionary biology was not yet ready for a quantitative treatment of “that which evolves”: the year of publication of “Information in Biology”16 coincided with the discovery of the structure of DNA, and the wealth of sequence data that catapulted evolutionary biology into the computer age was still half-a-century away. Colloquially, information is often described as something that aids in decision-making. Interestingly, this is very close to the mathematical meaning of “information”, which is concerned with quantifying the ability to make predictions about uncertain systems. Life—among many other aspects—has the peculiar property of displaying behavior or characters that are appropriate, given the environment. We recognize this of course as the consequence of adaptation, but the outcome is that the adapted organism’s decisions are “in tune” with its environment: the organism has information about its environment. One of the insights that has emerged from the theory of computation is that information must be physical: information cannot exist without a physical substrate that encodes it17. In computers, information is encoded in zeros and ones, which themselves are represented by different voltages on semiconductors. The information we retain in our brains also has a physical substrate, even though its physiological basis depends on the type of memory and is far from certain. Context-appropriate decisions require information, however it is stored. For cells, we