value of the protein for each family. FIG. 5: Entropy of COX subunit II (PF00116 in the Pfam database, accessed June 22nd, 2006) protein sequences as a function of taxonomic depth for selected different groups (at least 200 sequences per group), connected by phylogenetic relationships. 120 core residues were used to calculate the molecular entropy. 4. Evolution of information in robots and animats The evolution of information within the genes of adapting organisms is but one use of information theory in evolutionary biology. Just as anticipated in the heydays of the “Cybernetics” movement48, information theory has indeed something to say about the evolution of information-processing in animal brains. The general idea behind the connection between information and function is simple: because information (about a particular system) is what allows the bearer to make predictions (about that particular system) with accuracy better than chance, information is valuable as long as prediction is valuable. In an uncertain world, making accurate predictions is tantamount to survival. In other words, we expect that information, acquired from the environment and processed, has survival value and therefore is selected for in evolution. 4.1. Predictive information The connection between information and fitness can be made much more precise. A key relation between information and its value for agents that survive in an uncertain world as a consequence of their actions in it was provided by Ay et al.49, who applied a measure called “predictive information” (defined earlier by Bialek et al.50 in the context of dynamical systems theory) to characterize the behavioral complexity of an autonomous robot. These authors showed that the mutual entropy between a changing world (as represented by changing states in an organism’s sensors) and the actions of motors that drive the agent’s behavior (thus changing the future perceived states) is equivalent to Bialek’s predictive information as long as the agent’s decisions are Markovian, that is, only depend on the state of the agent and the environment at the preceding time. This predictive information is defined as the shared entropy between motor variables Y and t the sensor variables at the subsequent time point X t+1 I = I(Y :X )= H(X )−H(X |Y) . (21) pred t t+1 t+1 t+1 t (cid:0) Here, is the entropy of the sen(cid:0)so r states at time , defined as (cid:0) H(X )=−∑p(x )log p(x ) , (22) t+1 t+1 t+1 x t+1 using the probability distribution p(x ) over the sensor states x at time t +1. The t+1 t+1 conditional entropy H(X |Y) characterizes how much is left uncertain about the future t+1 t (cid:0) sensor states X given the robot’s actions in the present, that is, the state of the motors t+1 at time t, and can be calculated in the standard manner20,21 from the joint probability (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) distribution of present motor states and future sensor states p(x |y ). (cid:0) t+1 t As (cid:0)E q. (21) implies, the predictive information measures how much of the entropy of sensorial states—that is, the uncertainty about what the detectors will record next—is explained by the motor states at the preceding tim(cid:0)e point. For example, if the motor states at time t perfectly predict what will appear in the sensors at time , then the predictive information is maximal. Another version of the predictive information studies not the effect the motors have on future sensor states, but the effect the sensors have on future motor states instead, for example in order to guide an autonomous robot through a maze51. In the former case, the predictive information quantifies how actions change the perceived world, while in the latter case the predictive information characterizes how the perceived world changes the robot’s actions. Both formulations, however, are equivalent when taking into account how world and robot states are being updated51. While it is clear that measures such as predictive information should increase as an agent or robot learns to behave appropriately in a complex world, it is not at all clear whether information could be used as an objective function that, if maximized, will lead to appropriate behavior of the robot. This is the basic hypothesis of Linsker’s “Infomax” principle52, which posits that neural control structures evolve to maximize “information preservation” subject to constraints. This hypothesis implies that the infomax principle could play the role of a guiding force in the organization of perceptual systems. This is precisely what has been observed in experiments with autonomous robots evolved to perform a variety of tasks. For example, in one task visual and tactile information had to be integrated in order to grab an object53, while in another groups of five robots were evolved to move in a coordinated fashion54 or else to navigate according to a map55. Such experiments suggest that there may be a deeper connection between information