can write the network random variable as a product of the random variables that describe each node i, that is, each neuron, as (n is the number of nodes in the network) Z = Z(1)Z(2)Z(n) , (25) t t t t which allows us to calculate the amount of information processed by each individual node i as (cid:0) I(i) = I(Z(i):Z(i)) . (26) t t+1 Note that I omitted the index t on the left-hand-side of Eqs. (24) and (26), assuming that the dynamics of the network becomes stationary as , and thus that a sampling of (cid:0) the network states at any subsequent time points becomes representative of the agent’s behavior. If the nodes in the network process information independently from each other, then the sum (over all neurons) of the information processed by each neuron would equal b The notation is slightly modified here to conform to the formalism used in Ref.51 the amount of information processed by the entire network. The difference between the two then represents the amount of information that the network processes over and above the information processed by the individual neurons, the synergistic information51: n SI = I(Z :Z )−∑I(i)(Z(i):Z(i)) . (27) atom t t+1 t t+1 i=1 The index “atom” on the synergistic information reminds us that the sum is over the indivisible elements of the network: the neurons themselves. As we shall see below, other (cid:0) more general partitions of the network are possible, and often times more appropriate to capture synergy. The synergistic information is related to other measures of synergy that have been introduced independently. One is simply called “integration” and defined in terms of Shannon entropies as64,66,67 n ∑H(Z(i))−H(Z ) . (28) t t i=1 This measure has been introduced earlier under the name “multi-information”68,69. Another measure, called Φ in Ref.51, was independently introduced by Ay and (cid:0) atom Wennekers70,71 as a measure of the complexity of dynamical systems they called “stochastic interaction”, and is defined as n(cid:0) Φ = ∑H(Z(i) |Z(i))−H(Z |Z ). (29) atom t t+1 t t+1 i=1 Note the similarity between Eqs. (27-29): while (27) measures synergistic information, (28) measures “synergistic entropy” and (29) synergistic conditional entropy in turn. The (cid:0) three are related because entropy and information are related, as for example in Eqs. (11) and (21). Using this relation, it is easy to show that51 Φ = SI + . (30) atom atom While we can expect that measures such as (28-30) quantify some aspects of information integration, it is likely that they overestimate the integration because it is possible that (cid:0) elements of the computation are performed by groups of neurons that together behave as a single entity. In that case, subdividing the whole network into independent neurons may lead to the double-counting of integrated information. A cleaner (albeit computationally much more expensive) approach is to find a partition of the network into non-overlapping groups of nodes (parts) that are as independent of each other (information-theoretically speaking) as possible. If we define the partition P of a network into k parts via P = { P(1),P(2),P(k)} , where each P(i) is a part of the network (an non-empty set of neurons with no overlap between the parts), then we can define a quantity that is analogous to Eq. (29) except that the sum is over the parts rather than the individual neurons61 (cid:0) (cid:0) n Φ(P)= ∑H(P(i) |P(i))−H(P |P ) . (31) t t+1 t t+1 i=1 In Eq. (31), each part carries a time label because every part takes on different states as time proceeds. The so-called “Minimum Information Partition” (or MIP) is found by (cid:0) minimizing a normalized Eq. (31) over all partitions Φ(P) MIP = arg min t , (32) P N(P) t where the normalization N(P)=(k−1)min [ H (P(i)) ] balances the parts of the t i max t partition62. Using this MIP, the integrated information Φ is then simply given by (cid:0) Φ=Φ(P =MIP) . (33) (cid:0) Lastly, we need to introduce one more (cid:0)c oncept in order to measure information integration in realistic evolving networks. Because the Φ of a network with a single (or (cid:0) more) disconnected nodes vanishes (because the MIP for such a network is always the partition into the connected nodes in one part, and the disconnected in another) we should attempt to define the computational “main complex”, which is that subset of nodes for which Φ is maximal62. This measure w (cid:0) ill be called Φ in the following. MC (cid:0) (cid:0) FIG. 6 A: Three candidate measures of information integration Φ (29), Φ , and (28) atom MC along the line of descent of a representative evolutionary run in which animats adapted to solve a two-dimensional maze. B: Three measures of information processing, in the same run. Blue: total