organism’s decisions are “in tune” with its environment: the organism has information about its environment. One of the insights that has emerged from the theory of computation is that information must be physical: information cannot exist without a physical substrate that encodes it17. In computers, information is encoded in zeros and ones, which themselves are represented by different voltages on semiconductors. The information we retain in our brains also has a physical substrate, even though its physiological basis depends on the type of memory and is far from certain. Context-appropriate decisions require information, however it is stored. For cells, we now know that this information is stored in a cell’s inherited genetic material, and is precisely the kind that Shannon described in his 1948 articles. If inherited genetic material represents information, then how did the information-carrying molecules acquire it? Is the amount of information stored in genes increasing throughout evolution, and if so, why? How much information does an organism store? How much in a single gene? If we can replace a discussion of the evolution of complexity along the various lines of descent by a discussion of the evolution of information, perhaps then we can find those general principles that have eluded us so far. In this review, I focus on two uses of information theory in evolutionary biology: First, the quantification of the information content of genes and proteins and how this information may have evolved along the branches of the tree of life. Second, the evolution of information-processing structures (such as brains) that control animals, and how the functional complexity of these brains (and how they evolve) could be quantified using information theory. The latter approach reinforces a concept that has appeared in neuroscience repeatedly: the value of information for an adapted organism is fitness18, and the complexity of an organism’s brain must be reflected in how it manages to process, integrate, and make use of information for its own advantage19. 2. Entropy and Information in Molecular Sequences To define entropy and information, we first must define the concept of a random variable. In probability theory, a random variable X is a mathematical object that can take on a finite number of different states x x with specified probabilities p,,p . We 1 n 1 n should keep in mind that a mathematical random variable is a description—sometimes accurate, sometimes not—of a physical object. For example, the random variable that we would use to describe a fair coin has two states: x =heads and x =tails, with (cid:0) 1 (cid:0) 2 probabilities p = p =0.5. Of course, an actual coin is a far more complex device: it may 1 2 deviate from being true, it may land on an edge once in a while, and its faces can make different angles with true North. Yet, when coins are used for demonstrations in (cid:0) (cid:0) probability theory or statistics, they are most succinctly described with two states and two (cid:0) equal probabilities. Nucleic acids can be described probabilistically in a similar manner. We can define a nucleic acid random variable X as having four states x = A, x =C, x =G and x = T which it can take on with probabilities p,,p , while 1 2 3 4 1 4 being perfectly aware that the nucleic acid molecules themselves are far more complex, and deserve a richer description than the four-state abstraction. But given the role that these molecules play as information carriers of the genetic material, this abstraction will (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) serve us very well going forward. 2.1 Entropy Using the concept of a random variable X, we can define its entropy (sometimes called uncertainty) as20,21 n H(X)=−∑p logp . (1) i i i=1 Here, the logarithm is taken to an arbitrary base that will normalize (and give units to) the entropy. If we choose the dual logarithm, the units are “bits”, while if we choose base e, the units are(cid:0) “ nats”. Here, I will often choose the size of the alphabet as the base of the logarithm, and call the unit the “mer”22. So, if we describe nucleic acid sequences (alphabet size 4), a single nucleotide can have up to one “mer” of entropy, while if we describe proteins (logarithms taken to the base 20), a single residue can have up to one mer of entropy. Naturally, a five-mer has up to 5 mers of entropy, and so on. A true coin, we can immediately convince ourselves, has an entropy of one bit. A single random nucleotide, by the same reasoning, has an entropy of one mer (or two bits) because 4 H(X)=−∑1/4log1/4=1. (2) i=1` What is the entropy of a non-random nucleotide? To determine this, we have to find the probabilities with which that nucleotide is found at a particular