maximize “information preservation” subject to constraints. This hypothesis implies that the infomax principle could play the role of a guiding force in the organization of perceptual systems. This is precisely what has been observed in experiments with autonomous robots evolved to perform a variety of tasks. For example, in one task visual and tactile information had to be integrated in order to grab an object53, while in another groups of five robots were evolved to move in a coordinated fashion54 or else to navigate according to a map55. Such experiments suggest that there may be a deeper connection between information and fitness that goes beyond the regularities induced by a perception-action loop, that connects fitness (in the evolutionary sense as the growth rate of a population) directly to information. Indeed, Rivoire and Leibler18 recently studied abstract models of the population dynamics of evolving “finite-state agents” that optimize their response to a changing environment and found just such a relationship. In such a description, agents respond to a changing environment with a probability distribution of changing from state to state , in order to maximize the growth-rate of the population. Under fairly general assumptions, the growth rate is maximized if the Shannon information that the agents can extract from the changing environment is maximal18. For our purposes, this Shannon information is nothing but the predictive information discussed above (see Supplementary Text S1 in Ref.51 for a discussion of that point). However, such a simple relationship only holds if each agent perceives the environment in the same manner, and if information is acquired only from the environment. If information is inherited or retrieved from memory, on the other hand, predictive information cannot maximize fitness. This is easily seen if we consider an agent that makes decisions based on a combination of sensory input and memory. If memory states (instead of sensor states) best predict an agent’s actions, the correlation between sensors and motors may be lost even though the actions are appropriate. A typical case would be navigation under conditions when the sensors do not provide accurate information about the environment, but the agent has nevertheless learned the required actions “by heart”. In such a scenario, the predictive information would be low because the actions do not correlate with the sensors. Yet, the fitness is high because the actions were controlled by memory, not by the sensors. Rivoire and Leibler show further that if the actions of an agent are always optimal given the environment then a different measure maximizes fitness, namely the shared entropy between sensors and variables given the previous time step’s sensor statesb: I = I(X :Y |X ) . (23) causal t t+1 t−1 In most realistic situations, however, optimal navigation strategies cannot be assumed. Indeed, as optimal strategies are (in a sense) the goal of evolutionary adaptation, such a (cid:0) measure could conceivably only apply at the endpoint of evolution. Thus, no general expression can be derived that ties these informational quantities directly to fitness. 4.2. Integrated Information What are the aspects of information processing that distinguish complex brains from simple ones? Clearly, processing large amounts of information is important, but a large capacity is not necessarily a sign of high complexity. It has been argued that a hallmark of complex brain function is its ability to integrate disparate streams of information and mold them into a complex gestalt that represents more than the sum of its parts56-65. These streams of information come from different sensorial modalities such as vision, sound, and olfaction, but also (and importantly) memory, and create a conscious experience in our brains that allows us to function at levels not available to purely reactive brains. One way to measure how much information a network processes is to calculate the shared entropy between the nodes at time t and time t+1 I = I(Z :Z ) . (24) total t t+1 Here, represents the state of the entire network (not just the sensors or motors) at time t, and thus the total information captures information processing among all nodes of the (cid:0) network, and can in principle be larger or smaller than the predictive information that only considers processing between sensor and motors. We can write the network random variable as a product of the random variables that describe each node i, that is, each neuron, as (n is the number of nodes in the network) Z = Z(1)Z(2)Z(n) , (25) t t t t which allows us to calculate the amount of information processed by each individual node i as (cid:0) I(i) = I(Z(i):Z(i)) . (26) t t+1 Note that I omitted the index t on the left-hand-side of Eqs. (24) and (26), assuming that the dynamics of the network becomes stationary as , and thus that a sampling of (cid:0) the network