entropy , when measured in mers, is of course 57, so the information content is just 57 I =57−∑H(X |e ) , (16) Rodentia i Rodentia i=1 which comes out to (cid:0) I =25.29±0.09 mers , (17) Rodentia where the error is obtained from the theoretical estimate of the variance given the frequency estimate38. (cid:0) FIG. 2: Difference between entropic profile ∆Entropy of the homeobox protein of rodents and primates (the latter from 903 sequences in Pfam, accessed February 3rd, 2011). Error bars are the error of the mean of the difference, using the average of the number of sequences. The colored boxes indicate structural domains as determined for the fly version of this gene. (‘N’ refers to the protein’s “N-terminus”.) The same analysis can be repeated for the primate homeodomain protein. In Fig. 2, we can see the difference between the “entropic profile” of rodents and primates , (18) which shows some significant differences, in particular, it seems, at the edges between structural motifs in the protein. When summing up the entropies to arrive at the total information content of the primate homeodomain protein we obtain , (19) which is identical to the information content of rodent homeodomains within statistical error. We can thus conclude that while the information is encoded somewhat differently between the rodent and the primate version of this protein, the total information content is the same. 3. Evolution of Information While the total information content of the homeodomain protein has not changed between rodents and primates, what about longer time intervals? If we take a protein that is ubiquitous among different forms of life (that is, its homologue is present in many different branches) has its information content changed as it is used in more and more complex forms? One line of argument tells us that if the function of the protein is the same throughout evolutionary history, then its information content should be the same in each variant. We saw a hint of that when comparing the information content of the homeodomain protein between rodents and primates. But we can also argue instead that because information is measured relative to the environment the protein (and thus, the organism) finds itself in, then organisms that live in very different environments can potentially have different information content even if the sequences encoding the proteins are homologous. Thus, we could expect differences in protein information content in organisms that are different enough that the protein is used in different ways. But it is certainly not clear whether we should observe a trend of increasing or decreasing information along the line of descent. In order to get a first glimpse at what these differences could be like, I will take a look here at the evolution of information in two proteins that are important in the function of most animals: the homeodomain protein and the COX2 (cytochrome-c-oxidase subunit 2) protein. The homeodomain (or homebox) protein is essential in determining the pattern of development in animals: it is crucial in directing the arrangement of cells according to a particular body plan39. In other words, the homeobox determines where the head goes and where the tail. Although it is often said that these proteins are specific to animals, some plants have homeodomain proteins that are homologous to those I study here40. The COX2 protein, on the other hand, is a subunit of a large protein complex with 13 subunits41. While a non-functioning (or severely impaired) homeobox protein certainly leads to aborted development, an impaired COX complex has a much less drastic effect: it leads to mitochondrial myopathy due to a cytochrome oxidase deficiency42, but is usually not fatal43. Thus, by testing the changes within these two proteins, we are examining proteins with very different selective pressures acting on them. To calculate the information content of each of these proteins along the evolutionary line of descent, in principle we need access to the sequences of extinct forms of life. Even though the resurrection of such extinct sequences is possible in principle44 using an approach dubbed “paleogenetics”45,46, we can take a shortcut by grouping sequences according to the depth that they occupy within the phylogenetic tree. So, when we measure the information content of the homeobox protein on the taxonomic level of the family, we include in there the sequences of homeobox proteins of chimpanzees, gorillas and orangutans along with humans. As the chimpanzee version, for example, is essentially identical with the human version, we do not expect to see any change in information content when moving from the species level to the genus level. But, we can expect that by grouping the sequences on the family level (rather than the genus or species level), we move closer towards evolutionarily more ancient proteins, in particular because this group is used to reconstruct