42 are paired in a stem of the tRNA molecule in a Watson-Crick pair: to enable the pairing, a ‘G’ must be associated with a ‘C’, and a ‘T’ must be associated with an ‘A’. It does not matter which is at any position as long as the paired nucleotide is complementary. And it is also clear that these associations are maintained by the selective pressures of Darwinian evolution: a substitution that breaks the pattern leads to a molecule that does not fold into the correct shape to efficiently translate messenger RNA into proteins. As a consequence, the organism bearing such a mutation will be eliminated from the gene pool. This simple example shows clearly the relationship between information theory and evolutionary biology: fitness is reflected in information, and when selective pressures maximize fitness, information must be maximized concurrently. We can now proceed and calculate the information content. Each column in Eq. (7) represents a conditional probability to find a particular nucleotide at position 41 given a particular value is found at position 28. We can use these values to calculate the conditional entropy to find a particular nucleotide, given that position 28 is ‘A’, for example, as H(X |X = A)=−0.2log 0.2−0.8log 0.8 ≈0.72 bits . (9) 41 28 2 2 (cid:0) This allows us to calculate the amount of information that is revealed (about ) by knowing the state of . If we do not know the state of , our uncertainty about is 1.795 bits, as calculated above. But revealing that actually is an ‘A’ has reduced our uncertainty to 0.72 bits, as we saw in Eq. (9). The information we obtained is then just the difference: I(X :X = A)=H(X )−H(X |X = A) ≈1.075 bits , (10) 41 28 41 41 28 that is, just over one bit. The notation in Eq. (10), indicating information between two variables by a colon (sometimes a semi-colon) is conventional. We can also calculate the average amo(cid:0)u nt of information about X that is gained by revealing the state of X as 41 28 I(X :X ) =H(X )−H(X |X ) ≈0.64 bits . (11) 41 28 41 41 28 Here, H(X |X ) is the a(cid:0)v erage conditional entropy of X given (cid:0) X , obtained by 41 28 41 28 averaging the four conditional entropies (for the four possible states of X ) using the 28 probabilities(cid:0) w ith which X occurs in any of its four states, given by Eq. (3). If we apply 28 the same calculation to the pair of positions X and X , we should find that knowing (cid:0) 42 (cid:0) 28 (cid:0) X reduces our uncertainty about X to zero: indeed, X carries perfect information 28 42 28 (cid:0) about X . The covariance between residues in an RNA secondary structure captured by 42 (cid:0) the mutual entropy can be used to predict secondary structure from sequence alignments (cid:0) (cid:0) alone24. (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) 2.3 Information Content of Proteins We have seen that different positions within a biomolecule can carry information about other positions, but how much information do they store about the environment within which they evolve? This question can be answered using the same information-theoretic formalism introduced above. Information is defined as a reduction in our uncertainty (caused by our ability to make predictions with an accuracy better than chance) when armed with information. Here we will use proteins as our biomolecules, which means our random variables can take on 20 states, and our protein variable will be given by the joint variable X = X X X , (12) 1 2 L where L is the number of residues in the protein. We now ask: “How much information about the environment (rather than about another residue) is stored in a particular residue?” To(cid:0) answer this, we have to first calculate the uncertainty about any particular residue in the absence of information about the environment. Clearly, it is the environment within which a protein finds itself that constrains the particular amino acids that a position variable can take on. If I do not specify this environment, there is nothing that constrains any particular residue i, and as a consequence the entropy is maximal: H(X )= H =log 20 ≈4.32 bits . (13) i max 2 In any functional protein, the residue is highly constrained, however. Let us imagine that the possible states of the environment can be described by a random variable E (that takes (cid:0) on specific environmental states e with given probabilities). Then the information about j environment E =e contained in position variable X of protein X is given by j i I(X :E =e )= H −H(X |E =e ) , (14) i j max i j (cid:0) in p(cid:0)e rfect analogy to Eq.