be harmful to an organism, in the sense that signals perceived by a sensory apparatus overwhelm, rather than aid, an organism. Such a situation could arise when the signals are unanticipated, and simply cannot be acted upon in an appropriate manner (for example in animal development). It is conceivable that in such a case mechanisms will evolve that protect an organism from signals: this is the basic idea behind the evolution of canalization74, which is the capacity of an organism to maintain its phenotype in the face of genetic and environmental variation. I would like to point out, however, that strictly speaking, canalization is the evolution of robustness with respect to entropy (noise), not information. If a particular signal cannot be used in order to make predictions, then this signal is not information. In that respect, even the evolution of canalization (if it increases organismal fitness) increases the amount of information an organism has about its environment, because insulating itself from certain forms of noise will increase the reliability of the signals that the organism can use to further its existence. An interesting example that illustrates the benefit of information and the cost of entropy is the evolution of cooperation, couched in the language of evolutionary game theory75. In evolutionary games, cooperation can evolve as long as the decision to cooperate benefits the group more than it costs the individual76-78. Groups can increase the benefit accruing to them if they can choose judiciously who to interact with. Thus, acquiring information about the game environment (in this case, the other players) increases the fitness of the group via mutual cooperative behavior. Indeed, it was shown recently that cooperation can evolve among players that interact via the rules of the so-called “Prisoner’s Dilemma” game if the strategies that evolve can take into account information about how the opponent is playing79. However, if this information is marred by noise (either from genetic mutations that decouple the phenotype from the genotype or from other sources), the population will soon evolve to defect rather than to cooperate. This happens because when the signals cannot be relied upon anymore, information (as the noise increases) gradually turns into entropy. In that case, canalization is the better strategy, and players evolve genes that ignore the opponent’s moves79. Thus, it appears entirely possible that an information-theoretic formulation of inclusive fitness theory (a theory that predicts the fitness of groups76,77 that goes beyond Hamilton’s kin selection theory) will lead to a predictive framework in which reliable communication is the key to cooperation. 6. Conclusions Information is the central currency for organismal fitness80, and appears to be that which increases when organisms adapt to their niche13. Information about the niche is stored in genes, and used to make predictions about the future states of the environment. Because fitness is higher in well-predicted environments (simply because it is easier to take advantage of the environment’s features for reproduction if they are predictable), organisms with more information about their niche are expected to outcompete those with less, suggesting a direct relationship between information content and fitness within a niche (comparisons of information content across niches, on the other hand, are meaningless because the information is not about the same system). A very similar relationship, also enforced by the rules of natural selection, can be found for information acquired not through the evolutionary process, but instead via an organism’s sensors. When this information is used for navigation, for example, then a measure called “predictive information” is a good proxy for fitness as long as navigation is performed taking only sensor states into account: indeed, appropriate behavior evolves when information, not fitness, is maximized. If instead decisions are also influenced by memory, different information-theoretic constructions based on the concept of “integrated information” appear to correlate better with fitness, and capture how the brain forms more abstract representations of the world81 that are used to predict the states of the world on temporal scales much larger than the immediate future. Thus, the ability of making predictions about the world that range far into the future may be the ultimate measure of functional complexity82 and perhaps even intelligence83. Acknowledgements I would like to thank Matthew Rupp for collaboration in work presented in section 3, as well as J. Edlund, A. Hintze, N. Chaumont, G. Tononi, and C. Koch for stimulating discussions and collaboration in the work presented in section 4. This work was supported in part by the Paul G. Allen Family Foundation, The Cambridge Templeton Consortium, the National Science Foundation’s Frontiers in Integrative Biological Research Grant FIBR-0527023, as well as NSF’s BEACON Center for the Study of Evolution in Action under contract No. DBI-0939454. References 1. Darwin, C. 1859. On the Origin of Species By Means of Natural Selection. John Murray. London. 2. Futuyma, D. 1998.