a network is always the partition into the connected nodes in one part, and the disconnected in another) we should attempt to define the computational “main complex”, which is that subset of nodes for which Φ is maximal62. This measure w (cid:0) ill be called Φ in the following. MC (cid:0) (cid:0) FIG. 6 A: Three candidate measures of information integration Φ (29), Φ , and (28) atom MC along the line of descent of a representative evolutionary run in which animats adapted to solve a two-dimensional maze. B: Three measures of information processing, in the same run. Blue: total information I (24), green: atomic information SI (27), and red: predictive information I total atom pred (21) (from Ref.51). (cid:0) (cid:0) While all these measures attempt to capture synergy, it is not clear whether any of them co(cid:0)r relate with fitness when an agen(cid:0)t evolves, that is, it is not clear wheth(cid:0)e r synergy or integration capture an aspect of the functional complexity of control structures that goes beyond the predictive information defined earlier. To test this, Edlund et al. evolved animats that learned, over 50,000 generations of evolution, to navigate a two-dimensional maze51, constructed in such a way that optimal navigation requires memory. While measuring fitness, they also recorded six different candidate measures for brain complexity, among which the predictive information Eq. (21), the total information Eq. (24), the synergistic information Eq. (27), as well as the integration Eq. (28), the “atomic Φ” (29), as well as the computationally intensive measure Φ . Fig. 6 shows a MC representative run (of 64) that shows the six candidate measures as a function of evolutionary time measured in generations. During this run, the fitness increased steadily, with a big step around generation 15,000 where this particular animat evolved the (cid:0) capacity to use memory for navigation (from Ref.51). (cid:0) It is not clear from a single run which of these measures best correlates with fitness. If we take the fitness attained at the end of each of 64 runs and plot it against the fitness (here measured as the percentage of the achievable fitness in this environment), the sophisticated measure Φ emerges as the clear winner, with a Spearman rank MC correlation coefficient with achieved fitness of R=0.937 (see Fig. 7). This suggests that measures of information integration can go beyond simple “reactive” measures such as I in characterizing complex behavior, in particular when the task requires memory, as pred (cid:0) was the case there. (cid:0) FIG. 7: Correlation of information-based measures of complexity with fitness. Φ , , Φ , MC atom I ,I , and SI as a function of fitness at the end of each of 64 independent runs. R total pred atom indicates Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient. The red dot shows the run depicted in Fig. 6 (from Ref.51). (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) 5. F(cid:0)u ture Directions Needless to say, there are many more uses for information theory in evolutionary biology than reviewed here. For example, it is possible to describe the evolution of drug resistance in terms of loss, and subsequent gain, of information: when a pathogen is treated with a drug, the fitness landscape of that pathogen is changed (often dramatically) and as a consequence the genomic sequence that represented information before the administration of the drug is not information (or much less information) about the new environment22. As the pathogen adapts to the new environment, it acquires information about that environment and its fitness increases commensurately. Generally speaking, it appears that there is a fundamental law that links information to fitness (suitably defined). Such a relationship can be written down explicitly for specific systems, such as the relationship between the information content of DNA binding sites with the affinity the binding proteins have with that site72, or the relationship between the information content of ribozymes and their catalytic activity73. We can expect such a relationship to hold as long as information is valuable, and this will always be the case as long as information can be used in decision processes (broadly speaking) that increase the long-term of success of a lineage. It is possible to imagine exceptions to such a law where information would be harmful to an organism, in the sense that signals perceived by a sensory apparatus overwhelm, rather than aid, an organism. Such a situation could arise when the signals are unanticipated, and simply cannot be acted upon in an appropriate manner (for example in animal development). It is conceivable that in such a case mechanisms will evolve that protect an organism from signals: this is the basic idea behind the evolution of canalization74, which is the capacity of an organism to maintain its phenotype in the face of genetic and environmental variation. I would like to point out, however, that