consequence the entropy is maximal: H(X )= H =log 20 ≈4.32 bits . (13) i max 2 In any functional protein, the residue is highly constrained, however. Let us imagine that the possible states of the environment can be described by a random variable E (that takes (cid:0) on specific environmental states e with given probabilities). Then the information about j environment E =e contained in position variable X of protein X is given by j i I(X :E =e )= H −H(X |E =e ) , (14) i j max i j (cid:0) in p(cid:0)e rfect analogy to Eq. (10). How do w(cid:0)e calculate the information content of the entire protein, armed only with the information content of residues? If residues do not interact (that is, the s(cid:0)t ate of a residue at one position does not reveal any information about the state of a residue at another position), then the information content of the protein would just be a sum of the information content of each residue: L I(X :E =e )= ∑I(X :E =e ) . (15) j i j i=1 This independence of positions certainly could not be assumed in RNA molecules that rely on Watson-Crick binding to establish their secondary structure. In proteins, correlation b(cid:0)e tween residues are much weaker (but certainly still important, see, e.g.2533.), and we can take Eq. (15) as a first-order approximation of the information content, while keeping in mind that residue-residue correlations encode important information about the stability of the protein and its functional affinity to other molecules. Note, however, that a population with two or more subdivisions, where each subpopulation has different amino acid frequencies, can mimic residue correlations on the level of the whole population when there are none on the level of the subpopulations34. For most cases that we will have to deal with, a protein is only functional in a very defined cellular environment, and as a consequence the conditional entropy of a residue is fixed by the substitution probabilities that we can observe. Let us take as an example the rodent homeodomain protein35, defined by 57 residues. The environment for this protein is of course the rodent, and we might surmise that the information content of the homeodomain protein in rodents is different from the homeodomain protein in primates, for example, simply because primates and rodents have diverged about 100 million years ago36, and have since taken independent evolutionary paths. We can test this hypothesis by calculating the information content of rodent proteins and compare it to the primate version, using substitution probabilities inferred from sequence data that can be found, for example, in the Pfam database37. Let us first look at the entropy per residue, along the chain length of the 57-mer. But instead of calculating the entropy in bits (by taking the base-2 logarithm), we will calculate the entropy in “mers”, by taking the logarithm to base 20. This way, a single residue can have at most 1 mer of entropy, and the 57-mer has at most 57 mers of entropy. The entropic profile (entropy per site as a function of site) of the rodent homeodomain protein depicted in Figure 1 shows that the entropy varies considerably from site to site, with strongly conserved as well as highly variable residues. FIG 1: Entropic profile of the 57 amino acid rodent homeodomain, obtained from 810 sequences in Pfam (accessed February 3rd, 2011). Error of the mean is smaller than the data points shown. Residues are numbered 2-58 as is common for this domain35. When estimating entropies from finite ensembles (small number of sequences), care must be taken to correct for the bias that is inherent in estimating the probabilities from the frequencies. Rare sequences will be assigned zero probabilities in small ensembles but not in larger ones. Because this error is not symmetric (probabilities will always be underestimated), the bias is always towards smaller entropies. Several methods can be applied to correct for this, and I have used here the second order bias correction, described for example in Ref.38. Summing up the entropies per site shown in Fig. 1, we can get an estimate for the information content by applying Eq. (15). The maximal entropy , when measured in mers, is of course 57, so the information content is just 57 I =57−∑H(X |e ) , (16) Rodentia i Rodentia i=1 which comes out to (cid:0) I =25.29±0.09 mers , (17) Rodentia where the error is obtained from the theoretical estimate of the variance given the frequency estimate38. (cid:0) FIG. 2: Difference between entropic profile ∆Entropy of the homeobox protein of rodents and primates (the latter from 903 sequences in Pfam, accessed February 3rd, 2011). Error bars are the error of the mean of the difference, using the average of the number of sequences.