content of the homeobox protein on the taxonomic level of the family, we include in there the sequences of homeobox proteins of chimpanzees, gorillas and orangutans along with humans. As the chimpanzee version, for example, is essentially identical with the human version, we do not expect to see any change in information content when moving from the species level to the genus level. But, we can expect that by grouping the sequences on the family level (rather than the genus or species level), we move closer towards evolutionarily more ancient proteins, in particular because this group is used to reconstruct the sequence of the ancestor of that group. The great apes are but one family of the order of “Primates”, which besides the apes also contains the families of monkeys, lemurs, lorises, tarsiers, and galagos. Looking at the homebox protein of all the primates then takes us further back in time. A simplified version of the phylogeny of animals is shown in Fig. 3, which shows the hierarchical organization of the tree. FIG. 3: Simplified phylogenetic classification of animals. At the root of this tree (on the left tree) are the eukaryotes, but only the animal branch is shown here. If we follow the line of descent of humans, we move on the branch towards the vertebrates. The vertebrate clade itself is shown in the tree on the right, and the line of descent through this tree follows the branches that end in the mammals. The mammal tree, finally, is shown at the bottom, with the line ending in Homo sapiens indicated in red. The database Pfam uses a range of different taxonomic levels (anywhere from 12 to 22, depending on the branch) defined by the NCBI Taxonomy Project47, which we can take as a convenient proxy for taxonomic depth: ranging from the most basal taxonomic identifications (such as phylum) to the most specific ones. In Fig. 4, we can see the total sequence entropy 57 H (X)= ∑H(X |e ), (20) k i k i=1 for sequences with the NCBI taxonomic level k, as a function of the level depth. Note that sequences at level k always include all the sequences at level k-1. Thus, H (X), which is 1 the entropy (cid:0)o f all homeodomain sequences at level k =1, includes the sequences of all eukaryotes. Of course, the taxonomic level description is not a perfect proxy for time. On the vertebrate line for example, the genus Homo occupies level k=14, whereas the genus (cid:0) Mus occupies level k=16. If we now plot H (X) versus k (for the major phylogenetic k groups only), we see a curious splitting of the lines based only on total sequence entropy, (cid:0) and thus information (as information is just I=57-H if we measure entropy in mers). At the base of the tree, the metazoan sequences split into chordate proteins with a lower information content (higher entropy) and arthropod sequences with higher information content, possibly reflecting the different uses of the homeobox in these two groups. The chordate group itself splits into mammalian proteins and the fish homeodomain. There is even a notable split in information content into two major groups within the fishes. FIG. 4: Entropy of homeobox domain protein sequences (PF00046 in the Pfam database, accessed July 20th, 2006) as a function of taxonomic depth for different major groups that have at last 200 sequences in the database, connected by phylogenetic relationships. Selected groups are annotated by name. 57 core residues were used to calculate the molecular entropy. Core residues have at least 70% sequence in the database. The same analysis applied to subunit II of the COX protein (counting only 120 residue sites that have sufficient statistics in the database) gives a very different picture. Except for an obvious split of the bacterial version of the protein and the eukaryotic one, the total entropy markedly decreases across the lines as the taxonomic depth increases. Furthermore, the arthropod COX2 is more entropic than the vertebrate one (see Fig. 5) as opposed to the ordering for the homeobox protein. This finding suggests that the evolution of the protein information content is specific to each protein, and most likely reflects the adaptive value of the protein for each family. FIG. 5: Entropy of COX subunit II (PF00116 in the Pfam database, accessed June 22nd, 2006) protein sequences as a function of taxonomic depth for selected different groups (at least 200 sequences per group), connected by phylogenetic relationships. 120 core residues were used to calculate the molecular entropy. 4. Evolution of information in robots and animats The evolution of information within the genes of adapting organisms is but one use of information theory in evolutionary biology. Just as anticipated in the heydays of the “Cybernetics” movement48, information theory has indeed something to say