k k the costs into the cost vector c = (c ,c ,...,c )T. ing and prediction markets. In (Lay & Barbu, 2010) 1 2 NG The cost vector c will be interpreted as the aggregate and (Barbu & Lay, 2011), the authors consider agents probabilistic belief provided by the market: the probendowed with betting functions, and do experimental ability1 of k occurring is c . tests in the context of classifiers (leaves of the trees of k a random forest) trained on bootstrapped samples. In 3.2. Agent Actions (Storkey, 2011) the author develops a complementary approach, utilizing beliefs and utilities of individual A number of agents, enumerated by i = 1,2,...,N , A agents. He shows that a variety of machine learning act in the market. Each agent has wealth W , and ini model combination methods, including model averag- vests (or risks) an amount r in stock k. We collect ik ing, product models, factor graphs etc. can be imple- r =(r ,r ,...,r )T. A no arbitrage assumption2 i i1 i2 (cid:80) iNG mented using Machine Learning Markets. In (Chen & implies that c =1, meaning a probabilistic interk k Wortman Vaughan, 2010) the market is defined with pretation of c is reasonable. Likewise, we can require k respect to a global cost function, and they demon- allagentstospendalltheirwealth: ifanyagentwants strate achieving ‘no regret’ learning using information tokeepitasariskfreeinvestment,thatagentcansimmarkets. From another perspective, Agrawal et al. plypurchaseoneofeachstockinstead. Hence,without (Agrawal et al., 2010) looked at the equilibrium con- loss of generality, we have ditions of prediction markets in various situations of (cid:88) r =W . (1) matching buyers and sellers. The available informa- ik i tion is important for market conditions. This was dis- k cussedin(Jumadinova&Dasgupta,2011),wherethey Again without loss of generality, we will measure used a multi-agent system to examine the various de- wealth in units such that the total wealth across all pendencies on information reliability, rate etc. It is agents is 1: (cid:80) W =1. Hence (cid:80) r =1. i i ik ik the ability of prediction markets to aggregate belief Each agent is also endowed with a utility function that is key to their potential (Pennock & Wellman, U (W) denoting the utility of having wealth W. For 1997; Ottaviani & Sørensen, 2007), and much of the i the purposes of this paper we will only consider conexperimental work on prediction markets backs that cave utility functions. Finally, each agent has a belief up (Ledyard & Hanson, 2008). P , where P (k) denotes the probabilistic belief, for i i The potential of prediction markets has been consid- that particular agent i, that the outcome of k will be ered for some time. In (Arrow et al., 2008; Manski, k. Necessarily, as k enumerates all possible outcomes, 2006; Wolfers & Zitzewitz, 2004) the authors discuss (cid:80) P (k)=1 for all agents. k i the capability of practical prediction markets to capture accurate probabilities. In (Dani et al., 2006) the 1Strictly, the probability is c k divided by the unit of payout. This ensures dimensional consistency, both here authors compared a number of different mechanisms and elsewhere. for expert aggregation including a simple prediction 2No arbitrage: there is no opportunity for a risk free market approach. Different market designs have dif- (cid:80) gain. If c (cid:54)= 1 an agent can make a risk free win ferent features, and ensuring good prediction market by buying (o k r k selling) one of each stock which has a sure design with sufficient fluidity (Brahma et al., 2010) return (or debt) of 1 unit. Isoelastic Agents and Wealth Updates in Machine Learning Markets 3.3. Market isoelastic utility with the limiting value of η =1. The agents jointly act in a market. The market trans4.2. Market Equilibrium actions are subject to the macroscopic constraint The Market must satisfy the market constraint (2). (cid:88) NA r ik = (cid:88) NA W =1⇒ (cid:88) NA r =c (2) At the same time each agent attempts to maximise c k i ik k theirindividualutility. Itiswellknown(Arrow&Dei=1 i=1 i=1 where N is the number of agents. This states that breu, 1954) that, if the individual utilities are concave A wealthmustbeconservedinthemarket: thetotalpay- (as is the case in this paper), there is a unique fixed out were that item to occur matches the total original price point for which agents all attain their maximum wealth. Here r /c is the amount of good k bought utility and the market constraints are satisfied. This ik k by agent i (the amount invested divided by cost) and is called the market equilibrium. However, the exisso is the amount received if event k occurs. tence of a fixed point does not establish a means of obtainingit. Thequestionofhowamarketmightequi3.4. Summary Table librate formed part of the early discussion regarding i → agent k → good/outcome