usual sampling values for η using (η − 1) ∼ Γ(k,θ), with mixture coefficient updates applied to an α-mixture shape parameter k = 3 and scale parameter θ = 1. model. However multiple different values of α can be This produces a diverse set of η values for different used for different agents. agents, while ensuring η > 1. More risk averse utility functions (η > 1) were chosen as they emphasise re6. Results gionsofagreementbetweenagentsratherthanregions Machine Learning Markets with logarithmic and iso- of disagreement (see (7) and Figure 1). elastic agents were compared with decision trees, neu- The primary purpose of this analysis is to test differral networks and random forests on a number of UCI entpossibleprobabilisticcombinationmethodsagainst datasets3. Experimental data was split into two sets, other single classifiers. Hence, we compute test logwith 2/3 of the data being used for training and 1/3 likelihoodsasthemainevaluationmetric. Thisisgiven fortesting, withamaximumtotaldatasetsizeof3200 byLL= (cid:80)T log(P(k |x )),whereP(k |x )istheprobt t t t t items. For large multiclass data, we used the Letter ability of the true value k given covariates x . For a t t Recognition dataset. The markets of random forests market we have P(k |x ) = c where c is the equiwere built using the Matlab random forest imple- librium cost from the t m t arket k g t iven all agents in the mentation,treebagger,with20decisiontreespruned market know the covariates x. Logs of test likelihood byrequiringaminimumoftenofobservationspertree ratios are used when different models are compared. leaf. Individualdecision treeswereextracted fromthe random forest after it has been trained on all of the 6.1. Relative Classifier Performance training data, and were used to generate each of the We compare the methods used in Machine Learning 20agents’beliefs. Inourcomparisons,marketwealths Markets against other standard classifiers. Machine wereadaptedonthecompletetrainingsetwith1trainLearning Markets can utilise any probabilistic classiing epoch. 30 iterations of each test were performed fier as the beliefs for each agent, and so we compare a 3Available at: http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/ numberofsingleclassifierswithamarketofthoseclas- Isoelastic Agents and Wealth Updates in Machine Learning Markets 0.06 0.04 0.02 0 −0.02 −0.04 wav veh img ion brc snr Dataset delacS oitaR−doohilekiL goL test η but with significantly less computational cost. −260 −280 −300 −320 Figure 2. A boxplot (the red ’x’ represents the mean, and −340 blackdotsrepresentonestandarddeviationfromthemean) ofthescaledtestloglikelihood-ratiosintheisoelasticand logarithmic markets for many iterations, scaled by the number of data points. Note that in general, the loglikelihood for isoelastic agents is significantly higher than forlogarithmicagents. Letterrecognitionisexcludedasit would be off the top of the figure. sifiers. The exception is for random forests, which is already an aggregate classifier, and there we compare a random forest, against a market of trees that match the trees in the random forest. An inhomogeneous isoelastic market with batch updates is used for all comparisons. Table 2 presents the results along with standard deviations. The market approaches outperform all the standard approaches on all datasets, with clear statistical significance. This includes improvements over random forests. Interestingly, the market of neural networks performed better than the market of random trees in some settings. 6.2. Isoelastic versus Logarithmic Markets (cid:16) (cid:17) Figure2shows 1 log LISO ,whereN isthenumNTe LLOG Te ber of test points, and L denotes the test likelihood. This is referred to as the (scaled) log of the test likelihood-ratio between the inhomogeneous isoelastic market and the logarithmic market predictions. Ingeneral,theloglikelihood-ratiosarepositive,meaning that isoelastic markets have higher test performance than logarithmic markets. Further, they are positive to one standard deviation (the black dots in Figure 2), implying that isoelastic markets perform better (paired t-test p<0.01 in all cases). 6.3. Varying the Parameter of Isoelasticity Figure 3 shows that the test log-likelihood varies for homogeneous isoelastic markets with varying η. Searching for a good η via a cross validation process can be computationally expensive. An alternative approach is to randomly allocate an η to each of the agents, producing inhomogeneous markets, and perform market updates in order to tune the mixing proportions for the different agents. Figure 3 demonstrates that the inhomogeneous market provides results about as good as if we has known the optimal 5.1 57.1 2 52.2 5.2 3 4 5 6 8 01 51 02 03 05 (cid:100) value doohilekiL−goL tseT Figure 3. Boxplot showing the test log-likelihoods for differentvaluesofη(onwaveformdataset). Theredlinegives thetestlog-likelihoodforthesamedataandaninhomogeneous market with (η−1)∼Γ(3,1). The inhomogeneous market performs on par with the market with the best η value (’best’ as assessed a posteriori on the test data), without prior knowledge of good η values. 6.4. Batch Wealth Updates and Performance Figure 4 shows that adapting wealth improves the test log-likelihood. This is true for both logarithmic and isoelastic utility functions. We have noticed that wealth adaptation does not make a significant difference on accuracy for small multiclass datasets, however, improvements in accuracy are observed on the large multiclass Letter Recognition data. In general, learning is more beneficial in cases where some agents are significantly