Isoelastic Agents and Wealth Updates in Machine Learning Markets Amos J. Storkey a.storkey@ed.ac.uk Jonathan J. Millin j.j.millin@sms.ed.ac.uk Krzysztof J. Geras k.j.geras@sms.ed.ac.uk School of Informatics,University of Edinburgh Abstract basisofexpectedutilitytheory. Weshowthatawhole Recently, prediction markets have shown spectrum of aggregation methods are then available, considerable promise for developing flexible includingandextendingthoseprovidedbyα-mixtures. mechanismsformachinelearning. Inthispa- We demonstrate the empirical benefits of these aggreper, agents with isoelastic utilities are con- gation methods over those discussed above. sidered. It is shown that the costs asso- A number of authors have recently examined the posciated with homogeneous markets of agents sibilities of market mechanisms for implementing mawith isoelastic utilities produce equilibrium chine learning methods. Desirable properties of marprices corresponding to alpha-mixtures, with kets include the fact that agents act independently, aparticularformofmixingcomponentrelat- markets are inherently parallelisable and the fact that ing to each agent’s wealth. We also demon- the form of models produced by markets is more strate that wealth accumulation for logarith- general than explicitly defined probabilistic models. micandotherisoelasticagents(throughpay- Market based machine learning approaches are beoffsonpredictionoftrainingtargets)canim- ing shown to be consistent with standard probabilisplement both Bayesian model updates and tic machine learning formalisms (Storkey, 2011) as mixtureweightupdatesbyimposingdifferent wellprovidingregretboundsformarketmakers(Chen market payoff structures. An iterative algo- & Wortman Vaughan, 2010; Abernethy et al., 2011). rithmisgivenformarketequilibriumcompu- Markets are also a well studied and pervasive part of tation. We demonstrate that inhomogeneous our social and computational infrastructure. marketsofagentswithisoelasticutilitiesoutWe envisage the possibility of setting up online preperform state of the art aggregate classifiers diction markets for large scale multivariate prediction suchasrandomforests,aswellassingleclasproblems in which different algorithms compete. This sifiers (neural networks, decision trees) on a generalises prediction markets, which usually focus on numberofmachinelearningbenchmarks,and disconnected discrete events, and relates to other reshowthatisoelasticcombinationmethodsare centworkinutilisingalgorithmcrowdsourcingformagenerally better than their logarithmic counchinelearning(Abernethy&Frongillo,2011). Itwould terparts. provide an alternative to, say, the current interest in competition and challenge environments (e.g. Netflix, 1. Introduction Kaggle,PASCAL2),whereindividualscompeteforthe This paper addresses the problem of classifier aggre- best personal performance. Experience in these dogation through the use of Machine Learning Markets. mains has suggested that it is common for individual In supervised machine learning, many algorithms use algorithms to be outperformed by competitors groupsimple averaging, weighted averaging, mixtures, mix- ing together to produce model combinations (Bell & ing and log opinion pools for combining a variety of Koren, 2007). This mirrors the experience regarding classifiers to form aggregate classifiers. On the other aggregation of expert predictions (Dani et al., 2006). hand, prediction markets have been used for aggrega- The main novel contributions of this paper are: tionofsimplebeliefsinotherfields(themarketpriceis used as an aggregate probability). Some simple forms • Extending the set of standard agents from logaof theoretical prediction markets have been shown to rithmic agents and exponential agents to also inbe equivalent to weighted averaging (Barbu & Lay, clude the various forms of isoelastic agents, and 2011; Storkey, 2011). However, more generally, we toshowsuchagentscanreproduceandextendthe can formulate prediction market mechanisms on the α-mixtures framework (Amari, 2007). AppearinginProceedingsofthe29th InternationalConfer- • Demonstrating that online and batch agent enceonMachineLearning,Edinburgh,Scotland,UK,2012. wealth updates are equivalent to Bayesian posCopyright 2012 by the author(s)/owner(s). teriorupdatesandmixturecoefficientupdatesre- Isoelastic Agents and Wealth Updates in Machine Learning Markets spectively. will be critical for efficiently reaching equilibrium. In (Tsengetal.,2010)theauthorsexaminethestatistical • Equating the multi-agent equilibrium (fixedproperties of market agent models, whereas in (Lee & point) market with a divergence minimisation. Moretti,2009)theauthorsconsiderpredictionmarkets The result is an iterative process for establishing in the context of Bayesian learning. the market equilibrium values. • Demonstrating that Machine Learning Markets 3. Notation outperformindividualstrongclassifierswhenpresented with equivalent data. Showing that the Machine Learning Markets use prediction market markets improve on state of the art classifiers, mechanisms to generate machine learning models via such as random forests, and provide better log- themarketprice. Thebasicconceptsandnotationare probabilityperformanceonclassificationtestsets. now introduced. • Demonstrating that inhomogeneous sets of isoe3.1. Goods lastic agents produce better performance than logarithmic agents. Hence aggregation by simple We consider a set of market goods enumerated by k = mixtures can be improved upon. 1,2,...N G , each corresponding to a specific outcome of a discrete random variable, denoted k. The good k will pay out one unit of currency in the event that the 2. Other Related Work outcomeforkisk. Themarkethasacommonlyagreed cost c (0 < c < 1) for each good k and we collect A number of previous papers address machine learn- k k the costs into the cost vector c = (c ,c ,...,c )T. ing and prediction markets. In (Lay & Barbu, 2010) 1 2 NG The cost vector c will be interpreted as the aggregate and (Barbu & Lay, 2011), the authors consider agents probabilistic belief provided by the market: the probendowed with betting functions, and do experimental ability1 of k occurring is c . tests in the context of classifiers (leaves of the trees of k a random forest) trained on bootstrapped samples. In 3.2. Agent Actions (Storkey, 2011) the author develops a complementary approach, utilizing beliefs and