mixed, and are then ‘unsquashed’ again after mixing. The result of this is the areas of agreement between agents are emphasised relative to a standard mixture. As an alternative to (7), we can also write (cid:88) c = W Pη(c) (9) k i ik i where Pη(c) is defined as ik (cid:16) (cid:17)1/η c Pi(k) Pη(c)= k ck . (10) ik (cid:16) (cid:17)1/η (cid:80) c Pi(k(cid:48)) k(cid:48) k(cid:48) c k(cid:48) Again this is not closed form, but expresses the equilibriumc asaweightedsumoftheeffectivebeliefs Pη k ik that are associated with each agent once the impact of the combination with rest of the market is taken into account. Each effective belief is weighted by the agent’s wealth W before aggregation. i Isoelastic Agents and Wealth Updates in Machine Learning Markets In the discussion above, all the agents have utilities each time point the outcome is then revealed and all with the same value of η. This is a homogeneous mar- bets are cashed in. This is an online update scheme. ketstructure. Howeverthereisnorestrictiontohomo- LetWtdenotethewealthofagentiafterthetargetfor i geneity in the context of Machine Learning Markets. data point t is known and the winnings are received. Here an inhomogeneous market structure can be used For isoelastic agents (including logarithmic agents where different agents have different η values. Hence when η = 1), at each data point t, each agent bets the equilibria of Machine Learning Markets can im- the whole wealth Wt and gains a return of r /c , plement a broader set of combination processes than i ikt kt leading to standardα-mixtures,andsogeneralisestheα-mixture WtPη (c) formalism. WeshowinSection6thattheuseofanin- Wt+1 = i ikt (11) homogeneousmarketstructureprovidesimprovements i (cid:80) i(cid:48) W i t (cid:48) P i η (cid:48)kt (c) over standard mixtures for a variety of standard ma- using (10) and (9), and r from Table 1. ik chine learning benchmarks. If we equate Wt+1 with the concept P(i|D ) then i t+1 5. Training and Wealth Allocation this leads to Pη P(i|D ) We consider a classification problem, with a train- W i t+1 =P(i|D T+1 )= (cid:80) P ikt η P(i(cid:48) T |D ) (12) ing dataset D Tr consisting of covariates xn and cor- i(cid:48) i(cid:48)kt T responding classifications kn. We wish to learn the whichgivestheBayesianupdateruleonobservationof anewdatapointattimetforasingleagentlikelihood relationship between variables x and classifications k, so that given a test point x∗ we can provide a predic- P i η kt . For logarithmic agents the belief P i η kt = P i (k t ) and this just reduces to a Bayes update, treating each tive distribution for the value that the corresponding class label k∗ will take. A test dataset D is used to agentasanindependentprobabilisticmodel. ForisoeTe lasticagentsitisstillaBayesupdate,butwhereBayes evaluate the final performance. ruleusestheeffectivebeliefs Pη asthecomponentdisikt 5.1. Agent Beliefs and Wealth Updates tributions,insteadoftheindividualagentbeliefP i (k t ). The equilibrium cost ct for any item at time t after Each agent has an individual belief P (k). In this pai seeing data D is a standard Bayesian model average, per we consider agents that have used standard ma- T given by (9), as the weights are the posterior probachine learning algorithms on a training data set D Tr bilities associated with each agent (12). to derive their beliefs. The fact that these Bayesian updates occur for logEach agent has a specific wealth W . The wealth afi arithmic utilities (or equivalently log-loss) has been fects the market influence of that agent. An agent’s discussed in a different context in (Beygelzimer et al., action in the market changes the wealth of the agent: 2012). Establishing the extension of this rule for isoethechangeofwealthafterasingleinvestmentr ,anda i lastic agents is a novel generalisation. return on that purchase is given by r /c where k∗ ik∗ k∗ denotestheindexoftheeventthatoccurs. Theagents 5.1.2. Batch: Mixing Coefficient Updates make purchases in predictions across the whole trainBayesian model averaging is appropriate if we intering dataset, trading with the other agents. Payouts pret each agent as an alternative competing hypotheare then made and each agent makes a return on the sis, where ultimately one agent has the correct belief. investment. Agents that invest well (relatively) gain However, in many, or even most situations (see e.g. wealth,whereasagentsthatinvestingoodsthatdon’t (Domingos, 2000; 1997; Minka, 2002) for a continued pay out lose wealth and hence market influence. This discussion), we may believe that the most appropriate process can be repeated for a number of epochs. model is a combination of beliefs rather than a single For analytic purposes, we consider two wealth update one. In those settings Bayesian model averaging is inschemes: an online and a batch scheme. All the emappropriate. Rather, we may believe the data is best pirical analyses are done using the batch scheme. described by a mixture of probabilities, and we wish to determine optimal mixing proportions. 5.1.1. Online: Bayesian Model Updates Consider, instead, splitting the agent wealth equally Consider