X – AS ||2 → min problem (not necessarily with Euclidean metrics) with constraints on the sign of the A and S matrice elements was first suggested in [5] but become well-known after demonstration of its application to face recognition and word frequency analysis [6]. The requirement on the A and S elements to be positive creates the components’ sparsity effect (create vectors with many close to zeros entries), unlike the unconstrained PCA analysis. This is advantageous in many applications where a decomposition of a complex mixture of signals into a sum of components is needed, with positive weight of each of the component (subtraction is forbidden). Advantages of linear factorization methods compared to hierarchical clustering Hierarchical clustering is a method of choice in the majority of analyses of high-thrughput molecular biology data [7]. Its widespread use can be explained by the simplicity of understanding the method’s principle, ease of visual interpretation and availability of userfriendly software for applying it. However, in many applications, hierarchical clustering is not the most suitable method because of its known instability to a random removal of samples or features and separation of samples or features into non-intersecting groups. Functional studies in molecular biology show that the majority of genes have pleiotropic function. Almost every gene can respond to a variety of distinct external signals. Linear factorizaion methods have an intrinsic possibility to associate a gene (sensor) to several sources of signal (biological functions) which makes it a suitable tool for analysis of complex biological data. Moreover, since the linear factorization methods are based on some kind of averaging of the data (calculating data moments), they are intrinsically more stable to the presence of high levels of noise in the data and partial removal of samples, if compared to the agglomerative clustering methods. Linear matrix factorization for transcriptomic data analysis in cancer biology Space of genes and space of samples Cocktail party problem has a very close interpretation in molecular biology if the following interpretation is accepted: a gene is an analogue of a sensor which receives regulatory signals from several sources (biological factors), see Figure 2. The biological factors can be activities of transcription factors or other various influences coming from a particular intercellular context or from environment. The combination of factor activities regulates gene expression through a complex (and unknown) function. As the first approximation, we can assume that this function is linear: Expression(gene i, sample s) =  a gene iActivity (sample s). i=1..m Fj Fj An alternative, less mechanistical and more statistical, interpretation is also possible: hidden factors (such as patient age, sample quality, severity of diagnosis, etc.) are mixed together in a linear fashion to determine a position of a sample (for example, a tumor biopsy) in the multidimensional space with axes corresponding to the individual gene expressions. In the first case, a point in the data space is a gene and we will call it the “gene” space. In the second case, a point is a sample and we call it the “sample” space. It is important to distinguish these two interpretations in practical applications since it corresponds to two different problem statements. Technically, this corresponds to application of blind source separation methods to the initial or transposed matrix of gene expression. First report on application of ICA to deconvolution of signals in analysis of gene expression changes during yeast sporulation appeared in [8]. In this work, ICA components, called “modes of gene expression”, reproduced manually defined biological classes of yeast genes. First applications of NMF to yeast gene expression data was reported in [9] and to cancer in [10]. Since then the number of applications of matrix factorization methods in analysis of gene expression has grown very rapidly. There exist several reviews, comparing different methods and pointing out at their advantages and disadvantages [11, 1, 12, 13, 14]. Figure 2. Network and matrix representations of linear components. A) Network interpretation of matrix factorization methods. In the “space of genes”, each gene expression value is approximated by a weighted linear combination of few factor activities (which can be transcription factors, environmental factors, etc.). Biological samples are characterized by different factor activities, but the weights (network structure) do not depend on samples. In PCA ai implement maximum variance; in ICA ai have maximally non-gaussian distributions for each j j factor; in NMF ai ≥ 0. B) A matrix of data X is approximated as a product of low-rank matrices A (mixing matrix) j and S (score matrix). Each component corresponds to a row in A (meta-sample) and a column in S (metagene) and introduces two sets of weights for all genes and all samples. ICA and NMF outperforms other statistical methods with respect to biological interpretation First applications of ICA and NMF demonstrated their outperformance compared to more classical statistical