consist in performing the component extraction many times (hundreds or thousands) and selecting those which are frequently reproduced. Second importand distinction concerns ranking the components. In PCA, the components are naurally ranked by the proportion of variance they explain. There is no particular natural order in ICA or NMF components, though they can be ordered by a) their reproducibility (robustness) in bootstraps; b) the value of non-Gaussivity function (ICA); c) mutual information estimate between a component and the data; d) their L norms. In many applications of ICA and NMF,  the ordering is not essential, if the data dimension is first reduced using PCA. Thirdly, as we have already mentioned, ICA and NMF components does not have to be orthogonal in the initial space of data (Figure 1). As a result, they match more closely local data structures (for example, clusters or tails of the multidimensional data distribution). Table 1. A selection of freely available software, implementing ICA and NMF methods, suitable for application to large gene expression datasets. Software Type and Remark Web-site Status FastICA for Matlab The robust of components can http://www.cis.hut.fi/projects/ica/fastica/ Matlab implementation be computed by bootstraping of fast fixed via accompanying Icasso http://bsp.teithe.gr/members/downloads/Icasso.html point algorithm software for ICA FastICA for R R http://cran.rimplementation project.org/web/packages/fastICA/fastICA.pdf of fastICA bioNMF Web-based http://sbm.postech.ac.kr/pna/startAnalysis/onmf/ tool BRB-ArrayTools Plug-in for Implementation of NMF for http://linus.nci.nih.gov/BRB-ArrayTools.html BRB- gene expression analysis ArrayTools ftp://linus.nci.nih.gov/pub/NMF NMF Package ‘NMF’ was removed http://cran.rimplementation in from the CRAN repository but project.org/web/packages/NMF/index.html R is available in archive ONMF Web-tool for Orthogonal NMF, part of http://sbm.postech.ac.kr/pna/startAnalysis/onmf/ NMF Principal Network Analysis tool Last distinction that we mention here concerns non-negativity of NMF. Accordingly to their network interpretation (Figure 2A), ICA and PCA components correspond to biological factors (such as pathway activities) that can affect gene expression with a positive or a negative sign. In this model, a gene expression is a sum of positive and negative influences from different factors, and it suits the best to describe a deviation from some reference expression values (mean expression or gene expression in the normal tissue). NMF components rather model absolute abudances of transcripts: an active factor can positively contribute to the expression value but can not inhibit it. This makes NMF most suitable for deconvolving complex mixtures of molecules, such as in mass spectrometry data, though empirically NMF is able to extract meaningfull signals from gene expression (probably, corresponding to activating or enabling factors). Available implementations In the Table 1 we list the implementations of the blind source separation methods which are the most used in the analysis of cancer biology data. In this selection, we have focused on the public availability of the implementation, existence of documentation, and scalability for large datasets containing tens of thousands genes whose expression is measured in hundreds of biological samples. Summary Blind source separation methods have been applied to the analysis of high-throughput molecular biology data in many studies. It was demonstrated several times that the signals obtained by ICA and NMF are more biologically meaningful and reproducible compared other more classical methods (such as PCA, K-means, hierarchical clustering). Methods of blind source separation have a natural interpretation in terms of functioning of regulatory networks (Figure 2A) and take into account pleiotropy of genes. However, detailed and systematic understanding of the hidden signals revealed by these methods and reproduced independently of the technical platfoms and specific data collection methods, is still very limited. Much more efforts and experimental validations need to be invested into the detailed interpretation of these hidden factors, governing gene expression and cell functioning. Acknowledgements This work is supported by the grant INCA LABEL Cancéropole Ile-de-France, by the grant INVADE from ITMO Cancer (Call Systems Biology 2012) and by the grant “Projet Incitatif et Collaboratif Computational Systems Biology Approach for Cancer” from Institut Curie. AZ is a member of the team “Computational Systems Biology of Cancer”, Equipe labellisée par la Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer. References [1] A.N. Gorban, B. Kégl, D. Wunch, A. Zinovyev, Principal Manifolds for Data Visualization and Dimension Reduction, Lecture Notes in Computational Science and Engineering, Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg, 2008. [2] J. Herault, and C. Jutten, Space or time adaptive signal processing by neural network models, In Neural Networks for Computing: AIP Conference Proceedings 151, American Institute for Physics, New York, 1986. [3] P. Comon, Independent component analysis, a new concept?, Signal Process. 36 (1994) 287-314. [4] A. Hyvärinen, J. Karhunen, E. Oja, Independent Component Analysis, Wiley, New York, 2001. [5] P. Paatero, U. Tapper, Positive matrix factorization: A non-negative factor model with optimal utilization of error estimates of data values, Environmetrics 5 (1994) 111–126. [6] D.D. Lee, H.S. Seung, Learning the parts of objects by nonnegative matrix factorization, Nature 401 (1999) 788791. [7] M.B. Eisen, P.T. Spellman, P.O. Brown, D. Botstein, Cluster analysis and display of genome-wide expression patterns, Proc.