component. One particular approach for feature selection in matrix factorization is connected to the “gene shaving” idea [32], which consists in iterative removal of the top-scored genes and re-adjusting the components to the remaining data. This approach was applied to cancer gene expression data with PCA components in [32] and for joint analysis of gene expression and copy number data using ICA components in [33]. ICA components were used to define biomarkers in ovarian cancer in [34], and in a meta-study of four different cancers in [35]. To find more robust and biologically meaningful biomarkers, Najarian et al [36] suggested combining the results of ICA analysis and protein-protein interaction networks in one data analysis pipeline. Interpretation of linear components One of the major challenges in applying linear matrix factorization methods is interpretability of the extracted components. Clustering methods provide their results in the form of relatively small gene sets or groups of samples that can be inspected for the presence of meaningfull biological signals or over-representation of samples of a particular type (in cancer, this can be samples of a particular grade or stage, or samples differently contaminated with a normal tissue, or samples belonging to a particular batch). By contrast, linear components rather corresponds to weigheted collections of many (usually all) genes and samples. Let us outline here the methods used to interpret them. In mathematical terms, a linear component can be represented in three ways: 1) geometrically, as a basis vector in “gene” or “sample” space (Figure 1) and a set of projection values of genes or samples onto the component; 2) in matrix terms, as a row of the mixing matrix A and the corresponding column of the signal matrix S (Figure 2B); 3) in terms of a network connecting hidden factors and genes, as a profile of the hidden factor activities in samples and connection weights (Figure 2A). To connect an extracted component with our knowledge of biology, a weigheted set of genes (sometimes called a metagene [10]) can be interpreted using the following methods. Firstly, a threshold on the weight (absolute or signed value) can be used to convert the metagene into a relatively small set of genes for which all “standard” methods of interpretation (including a visual inspection) can be applied, such as a hypergeometrical test for enrichment with a specific gene set (such as a Gene Ontology [37] or a pathway or a set of genes co-localized in the genome). Secondly, the whole set of weights, without introducing a thershold, can be used in Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) [38] or similar methods using Kolmogorov-Smirnov like statistical tests. Thirdly, the gene ranking introduced by their weights in a metagene, can be interpreted using interaction networks in analyses such as finding Optimally Functionally Enriched Network (OFTEN) [39] or similar methods. A weigheted set of samples (sometimes called a meta-sample [35]) can be interpreted using the following ideas. Firstly, one can look at the weight histogram and, if the histogram shows a multimodal distribution, classify biological samples into groups (clusters) that can be interpreted independently, as in “standard” methods (for example, in the standard survival analysis setting). Secondly, one can test if the weights separate significantly or correlate to a particular biological or technical factor (such as patient’s age or tumour grade or a particular tumour type or a particular experimental batch). Brief comparison of linear factorization methods: PCA, ICA and NMF Methods of linear factorization, mentioned in this review, all follow the same principle of approximating a matrix of data by a simpler and low-dimensional matrix. However, there are specific features that can make them suitable or inappropriate in particular applications [13, 14]. First distinctive feature is uniqueness of components. Since PCA corresponds to a simple and unconstrained quadratic optimisation problem, the whole set of principal components corresponds to the global minimum: hense, principal components are unique. By contrast, independent and NMF components realize local minima of the optimisation function that are multiple. In ICA this is because one solves a non-linear optimisation problem while in NMF this is a result of a constrained optimisation problem. To deal with non-uniqueness of the components and their dependence on initial approximations, bootstraping techniques are applied that consist in performing the component extraction many times (hundreds or thousands) and selecting those which are frequently reproduced. Second importand distinction concerns ranking the components. In PCA, the components are naurally ranked by the proportion of variance they explain. There is no particular natural order in ICA or NMF components, though they can be ordered by a) their reproducibility (robustness) in bootstraps; b) the value of non-Gaussivity function (ICA); c) mutual information estimate between a component and the data; d) their L norms. In many applications of ICA and NMF,  the ordering is not essential, if the data dimension