on samples. In PCA ai implement maximum variance; in ICA ai have maximally non-gaussian distributions for each j j factor; in NMF ai ≥ 0. B) A matrix of data X is approximated as a product of low-rank matrices A (mixing matrix) j and S (score matrix). Each component corresponds to a row in A (meta-sample) and a column in S (metagene) and introduces two sets of weights for all genes and all samples. ICA and NMF outperforms other statistical methods with respect to biological interpretation First applications of ICA and NMF demonstrated their outperformance compared to more classical statistical methods (PCA, clustering) with respect to biological interpretation of extracted signals [15]. Similar conclusions were made in [16] for a dataset of endometrial cancers. In [17], the first meta-study comparing ICA with other methods in several large-scale gene expression datasets was performed, including normal human tissues dataset. It was suggested to use the enrichment significance score of Gene Ontology terms in the components as a measure of the method performance, and ICA or NMF outperformed other unsupervised learning methods (PCA, K-Means) in most of the studies. Data preconditioning by ICA and NMF improve performance of tumor classification In a number of works ICA, NMF and their modifications were used to improve the performance of supervised tumor classification [10, 18, 19, 20, 21]. The general message of these works is that applying classification methods in the space of selected ICA and NMF factors allows either to better stratify a particular cancer into molecular subtypes, or to make better diagnosis and prognosis. Methods of blind source separation are well-suited for diminishing the effects of non-biological or non-relevant factors on the analysis of expression data that is a major problem in many highthroughput studies [22]. Matrix factorization techniques were already applied for filtering out those signals in gene expression datasets which could be not directly related to tumorigenesis and can confound the biological signals. Thus, Wang et al suggested using ICA decomposition for improving molecular classification of cancers by correcting for tissue heterogeneity and stromal contamination [23]. Recently, Teschendorff et al used ICA to model and correct for presence of known confounding factors in the analysis of microarray data [25]. It was shown that this approach can adjust data analysis for presence of such confounders as beadchip effect and variations in bisulfite conversion efficiency in DNA methylation chips, and for estrogen receptor status and tumour size in gene expression arrays obtained for breast tumour biopsies. Data-driven discovery of reproducible biological factors governing tumorigenesis The most interesting use of matrix factorization in cancer biology is to find common and universal factors governing tumorigenesis. One of the early attempts of this was undertaken in [24]. For the particular case of breast cancer, independent components extracted for gene expression profiles of breast cancer cell lines were characterized in [26] for cell lines and in [27] for tumors. In [28], several ICA algorithms were tested on 6 breast cancer datasets and the components were systematically interpreted using pathway and Gene Ontology annotations. The most robustly reproduced components from many independent studies were related to immune response, proliferation, stroma and tumor microenvironment. In other cancers, the components connected to specific contaminations (by muscle fibers, epithelial tissue and others) were frequently found (for example, see [29]). Engreitz et al performed one of the largest gene expression meta-analysis (9395 arrays from 298 public datasets) using ICA which resulted in detection of 423 fundamental components (modules) [30]. Using them, predictions on the mechanism of the anti-cancer drug parthenolide were made. Biomarker discovery Each ICA or NMF component ranks the genes accordingly to their projection value. This ranking can be utilized for extracting biomarkers [31]. For example, if a component correlates with a tumor classification (for example, good and bad prognosis classes) then the corresponding prognostic markers can be identified. Discovery of biomarkers is tightly connected to the problem of feature selection for further application of machine learning methods. The problem consists in selecting relatively small but sufficient number of non-redundant and reproducible features (for example, genes or singlenucleotide polymorphisms) to represent a linear component. In practice, this can lead to selecting from several to few tens or hundreds of features per component. One particular approach for feature selection in matrix factorization is connected to the “gene shaving” idea [32], which consists in iterative removal of the top-scored genes and re-adjusting the components to the remaining data. This approach was applied to cancer gene expression data with PCA components in [32] and for joint analysis of gene expression and copy number data using ICA components in [33]. ICA components were used to define biomarkers in ovarian cancer in [34], and in a meta-study of four different cancers in [35]. To find more robust and biologically meaningful biomarkers, Najarian et al [36] suggested