BLIND SOURCE SEPARATION METHODS FOR DECONVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SIGNALS IN CANCER BIOLOGY Zinovyev A.1,2,3*,†, Kairov U.4,5,†, Karpenyuk T.4 and Ramanculov E.5 1Institute Curie, Paris, France 2INSERM U900, Paris, France 3Mines ParisTech, Fontainebleau, France 4Kazakh National University after Al-Farabi, Almaty, Kazakhstan 5National Center for Biotechnology of the Republic of Kazakhstan, Astana, Kazakhstan *Corresponding author e-mail: andrei.zinovyev@curie.fr †These two authors contributed equally to the work Abstract Two blind source separation methods (Independent Component Analysis and Non-negative Matrix Factorization), developed initially for signal processing in engineering, found recently a number of applications in analysis of large-scale data in molecular biology. In this short review, we present the common idea behind these methods, describe ways of implementing and applying them and point out to the advantages compared to more traditional statistical approaches. We focus more specifically on the analysis of gene expression in cancer. The review is finalized by listing available software implementations for the methods described. Introduction Linear approximation of large datasets In many fields of science, data can be represented as a rectangular matrix with some objects (for example, n genes) corresponding to the matrix rows and the objects’ features (for example, gene expression in m tumor biopsies) corresponding to the matrix columns. These matrices can be huge: thus, methods for revealing patterns in the distribution of the matrix element values are of extreme use. One particular approach is connected to the idea of approximating a rectangular matrix by another matrice, having much lower rank: X ≈ AS, where X is a matrix of data of size m×n, and A is a m×k matrix, k << m. We will call the rows of the A matrix components (mdimensional vectors), and the columns of the S matrix projections of data vectors onto the components (a k-dimensional vector for each of n data points). A simple optimization problem || X – AS ||2 → min with Euclidean metrics leads to the wellknown Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) or, equivalently, Principal Component Analysis (PCA), two fundamental methods introduced in the data analysis more than one hundred years ago [1]. These methods work best in the case of multidimensional Gaussian data distribution. Several families of statistical methods were suggested in 1980-1990s implementing additional constrains put on the choice if components, including blind source separation techniques, which we will describe below (see Figure 1). Figure 1. Simple example of 2D data cloud with three methods of matrix approximation applied. Here small circles are data points, PCs are principal components (PC1 explains maximum of variance, PC1 and PC2 are orthogonal), ICs are independent components (give maximally non-gaussian distribution of the projections), NFs are nonnegative matrix factorization components (the data points have only positive projections on them). Cocktail party problem or blind source signal separation Cocktail party problem was initially formulated in signal processing [2]. It consists in decomposing a complex mixture of audio signals coming from different sources (at a real party it can be music, talking, singing, applauding, etc.) and mixed by several sensors (party microphones distributed around the party hall) with weights dicreasing with the distance from the sensor to the source of the signal. The problem is solvable given statistical independence of the signal sources (it is much more difficult of impossible to distinguish separate voices in a chore). Independent Component Analysis (ICA) The idea of ICA was first formulated and named by Herault and Jutten back in 1982. It was suggested using higher-order moments for matrix approximation, considering all Gaussian signals as noise. It was followed by other similar works and was rigorously and theoretically described in [3]. Efficient and fast algorithms were developed for ICA [4]. It was shown that the requirement of statistical independence is equivalent to maximizing non-gaussivity of data point projections onto the components, measured by some combination of higher data distribution moments (kurtosis) or other functions (negentropy, tangent function, etc.) The Gaussian signal contained in the data is usually subtracted from the data before application of ICA by data whitening such that all second moments become equal unity. Therefore, independent components can be non-orthogonal in the original space of data, which can be considered as an advantage in applications (Figure 1). Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) The idea of solving || X – AS ||2 → min problem (not necessarily with Euclidean metrics) with constraints on the sign of the A and S matrice elements was first suggested in [5] but become well-known after demonstration of its application to face recognition and word frequency analysis [6]. The requirement on the A and S elements to be positive creates the components’ sparsity effect (create vectors with many close to zeros entries), unlike the unconstrained PCA analysis. This is advantageous in many applications where a decomposition of a complex mixture of signals into a sum of components is needed, with positive weight of