Of course the time complexity of the calculation of K(cid:48)(G) is a matter of concern. The graph isomorphism problem involves constructing an ‘efficient’ (subexponential)algorithmfortestingwhethertwogivengraphsareisomorphic. ThegraphisomorphismproblemisbelievedtobeinNP.Theproblemoftesting labeled graphs for isomorphism is polynomially equivalent to the graph isomorphism problem, and therefore the calculation of K(cid:48)(G) cannot be expected to have a polynomial time algorithm. We will see, however, that |K(G)−K(cid:48)(G)| is bounded by a constant independent of G. 4 Small patterns in biological networks One important development in network biology is the concept of network motifs [4,39], defined as recurrent and statistically significant sub-graphs found in networks, as compared to a uniform distribution in a random network. As is to be expected, biological networks are not random networks, because biological networks carry information necessary for an organism to develop. Motifs are believed to be of signal importance largely because they may reflect functional properties. For example, the function of the so-called FFL (Feed-Forward Loop) has been speculated to be a more stable transmitter of information among genes than other possible small network arrangements [3]. This motif consists of three genes: a regulator that regulates another regulator and a gene, this latter regulated by the two regulators (given that each of the regulatory interactions can be either an activation or a repression, this motif can be divided into 8 more refined subtypes). This 3-node motif has been found in E. coli [25,33], yeast [22,27], and other organisms [5,15,28,30,35,37]. Other motifs have been identifiedwithvarietiesofmemoryswitchestocontrolanddelayactions,among other possible useful biological functions. FFLs are only one class of network motif among 4 that have been identified [3]. The simplest kind of motif is the positive and negative autoregulation (with a self-loop as motif), abbreviated NAR and PAR respectively. There are also Single-input modules (SIM) and Dense overlapping regulons (DOR) or Multi-input motifs (MIMs). The SIM is a regulator that regulates a group of genes with no other regulator in between (with the only regulator regulating itself), and is identified with a coordinated expression function of a group of geneswhosesharedfunctioniscapableofgeneratingatemporalexpressionprogramandactivationorderwithdifferentthresholdsforeachregulatedgene. The DORs have been identified with a gate-array, carrying out a computation from multiple inputs through multiple outputs. Asaproof-of-principle,wehavepreviouslyshownthattopologicalproperties 11 of complex networks are indeed detected by approximations to K [40]. For Kolmogorov complexity, for example, the simplest possible motif is that which connects all nodes bi-directionally, which is consistent with the idea that such a motif would be biologically meaningless (unless assigning weights indicating levels of regulation). There is a debate, however, as to whether motif analysis is living up to its promise of breaking down complex biological networks in order to understand them in terms of minimal functions carried by these motifs. Indeed it has been suggested that the motif approach to networks has important limits (e.g. [19]). Evenwhentherearesomeknownfactsabouthowclassesofmotifsconnectto each other, such as FFLs and SIMs integrated into DORs and DORs occurring in a single layer (there is no DOR at the output of another DOR) [3], we think thestudyofmotifsandfullnetworksarenotalternativesbutarecomplementary approaches,asonecannotreconstructglobalpatternsfromlocalrepetitions,nor local patterns from global properties. 5 Compressibility of biological networks We know that for a random (Erd¨os-R´enyi) graph G, K(G) ∼ |E(G)| = (cid:0)n(cid:1) , 2 because edges being placed at random need to be described one by one in order to reconstruct the network from its “compressed” description without loss of information. Likewise,acompletegraphcofsize|V(c)|willhaveaKolmogorov complexity K(c) = log |V(c)|, because its description is trivial–everything is 2 connected–andonlythesizeofacompletegraphisneededinordertoreproduce it in full. This means that a statistical (Erd¨os-R´enyi) graph is also algorithmically(Kolmogorov)randomifitisnotproducedrecursively(e.g. producedbyan algorithm) but by a random process (most random computer-generated graphs are actually simulations of valid statistically random graphs), while a regular (e.g. a complete) graph has the lowest Kolmogorov complexity. Any other type of graph will lie between these theoretical extremes, so we can expect biological networkstohaveintermediatevaluesbetweensimplicityandmaximumalgorithmic randomness, or in other words, we can expect their randomness deficiency to be removed both from simplicity and randomness. As shown in Table. 1, Kolmogorov approximation values by incompressibility (denoted by C) lie right between the two extreme cases, fully connected (c) (or fully disconnected) graphs, because the size of the complete graph c is equal to G; and randomized graphs (denoted by r) are those constructed by randomly rewiring the network in a way that preserves the original degree distribution of G. That biological networks are neither random nor simple captures the fact that they contain non-trivial information as models or descriptions of non-stochastic processes of the living systems they represent. In other words, a biological network G has Kolmogorov complexity K(G) such that 0 ∼ K(c ) < K(G) < K(r ) ∼ 1, where r is a random- |V(G)| |V(G)| |V(G)| ized version of G and c the complete graph of size |V(G)|. For example, |V(G)| the Streptococcus pyogenes metabolic network with only ∼ 2500 links reaches 12 Table 1: Compression lengths (using Deflate) of a sample of 20 metabolic networks where |V(G)| is