in practice the convergence guaranteed by the result in this section is fast. 6.1 K(G) is not a graph invariant of G K(G) may be a computationally cheap to approximate up to a bounded error that vanishes in the size of the graph. However, K(G) does not uniquely determine G. Indeed, two non-isomorphic graphs G and H can have K(G)=K(H). In fact the algorithmic Coding theorem gives an estimation of how often this happens, and it is also related to a simple Pigeonhole argument. Indeed, if G or H are algorithmically (Kolmogorov) random graphs, then the probability that K(G) = K(H) grows exponentially. If G and H are complex, then their 14 algorithmic probability ∼1/2K(G) and ∼1/2K(H) is small and are in the tail of the algorithmic probability (the so called Universal distribution or Levin’s semi-measure) distribution ranging across a very small interval of (maximal) Kolmogorov complexity, hence leading to greater chances of value collisions. 7 Detection of graph properties Properties with threshold values are said to exhibit a “phase transition”, due to a principle analogous to the one observed in physical systems. One initial question is whether Kolmogorov complexity can detect the first, most basic tradeoff studied in ER networks, that is, a classical graph phase transition of connectivity. When the graph remains mostly disconnected (i.e. before the phase transition), its Kolmogorov complexity is close to K(G) = log|V|, but as soon as a “giantcomponent”emergesataboutedgeprobability log|V(G)| accordingtothe V(G) Erd¨os-R´enyitheorem[13], K(G)startsgrowingdrivenby|E|, ascanbeseenin Fig. 4. Erd¨os and R´enyi showed that if V(G)p→c>1, where c is a constant, thenanERrandomgraphGwith (cid:0)n(cid:1) pedgesonaveragewouldalmostcertainly 2 haveauniquegiantcomponentcontainingapositivefractionofthevertices,and no other component will contain more than O(log(n)) vertices, with V(G)=n and p∼ logn a sharp threshold for the connectedness transition of G(n). n LetP(x)=a x+a x2+...a xn beapolynomialofdegreen>2fittingthe 1 2 n data points x = K(G(p)) of a graph G with edge density p < 0.5 and graph i size |V(G)| = n. Then the phase transition is found in the local minimum of the non-convex fitted curve given by dP(x) d2P(x) =0 and ≥0 dx dx2 When undertaking the experiment on a large set of ER graphs, the transition is exactly where the inflection point of the local minimum of a fitted curve ofatleastdegree3appearsthatcanbeexposedinbothlogcomplexityandnormalizedplots,asseeninFig.4(toprightandbottomleft). ThisisbecauseK(g) can only grow if non-recursive, i.e. random information is introduced, although what we have in these experiments is recursive pseudo-randomness. Isolated edges remain of low complexity before the emergence of the giant component, andisolatedgraphswouldeventuallyshowrepetitionsiftheyarenotallowedto expand and produce larger components having almost a fourth of the possible numberofedgesbeforethenetworkstartsdecreasingincomplexity. Thissubtle behaviorismoredifficulttorevealifthecomplexityisnormalizedbyaconstant, as in Fig. 4 (top left). Because the threshold is sharp in the phase transition of the giant component, no changes to either the local or global distribution of 1s in the adjacency matrixorchangesintheuniformdistributionofthedegreesequencearedetected bymeasuressuchasShannonentropyorentropyrate. However,foralgorithmic complexity the main feature for the description of the graph emerges, and is 15 Figure 4: Top left: Curves of complexity of a network of 1051 nodes (the size of the Streptococcus pyogenes metabolic network) when varying the number of edges from 0 to the complete graph with 551775 links, normalized by a constant. The maximum complexity is reached when for (cid:0)n(cid:1) /2, i.e. edge density 2 50%. Top right: Complexity of an averaged curve of 10 ER graphs of size 100 nodes as a function of edge density normalized by a edge count. The curve is negatively skewed due to the connectivity phase transition upon emergence of the “giant component” (growing K). Bottom left: Complexity curves of three ER graphs (10 replicates each) of growing size (100, 200 and 500) showing that the maximum complexity after the emergence of the giant component asymptoticallyapproaches50%edgedensityandthedetectionofthegiantcomponent correspondstothetheoreticalpredictionlogn/n. Bottomright: Whiskerplotof 2144planarand4600non-planargraphswithsignificantlydifferentcomplexity values (for both BDM and compression algorithms). 16 therefore successfully captured, as seen in Fig 4 (top right). One can design a measure[45]todetectthegiantcomponenttransition, evenanentropicone, by taking as random variable the number of connected links or an equivalent description, but algorithmic complexity does it without changing either the focus of the measure or the description of the object, because it is a robust measure invariant to different object descriptions [45]. The giant component transition isonlyapropertytoillustratethepowerofalgorithmicinformationtheory,and Fig. 4 (top right) shows that there are numerical approaches that conform to theoretical expectations. Thereareotherpropertiesofgraphsrelatedtographembeddings,havingto dowithwhethertheedgesofagraphdonotcrosseachotheronaplane. Hence in a topological sense it is simpler when the graphs are drawn in a single plane. Interestingly, both BDM and lossless compression consistently assigned lower Kolmogorovcomplexitytoplanargraphs,asshowninFig.4(bottomright). The 6744graphsusedandclassifiedasplanarandnon-planargraphsweretakenfrom the repository function GraphData[] available in the WolframMathematica software v.10. In [40], it was also shown that graphs follow the approximations by BDM and lossless compression to the Kolmogorov complexity of their dual graphs, which is as theoretically expected, given that there is an algorithm of fixed size for producing a dual from a graph. 8 The Kolmogorov complexity of complex networks We are now equipped to calculate the Kolmogorov complexity of a complex network. We have already theoretically