Methods of Information Theory and Algorithmic Complexity for Network Biology∗ Hector Zenil†, Narsis A. Kiani and Jesper Tegn´er Unit of Computational Medicine, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institute & Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. Abstract We survey and introduce concepts and tools located at the intersectionofinformationtheoryandnetworkbiology. WeshowthatShannon’s informationentropy,compressibilityandalgorithmiccomplexityquantify different local and global aspects of synthetic and biological data. We showexamplessuchastheemergenceofgiantcomponents inErdo¨s-R´enyi randomgraphs,andtherecoveryoftopologicalpropertiesfromnumerical kineticpropertiessimulatinggeneexpressiondata. Weprovideexacttheoretical calculations, numerical approximations and error estimations of entropy,algorithmicprobabilityandKolmogorovcomplexityfordifferent typesofgraphs,characterizingtheirvariantandinvariantproperties. We introduceformaldefinitionsofcomplexityforbothlabeledandunlabeled graphsandprovethattheKolmogorovcomplexityofalabeledgraphisa good approximation of its unlabeled Kolmogorov complexity and thus a robust definition of graph complexity. Keywords: information theory; complex networks; Kolmogorov complexity; algorithmic randomness; algorithmic probability; biological networks. 1 Introduction Overthelastdecadenetworktheoryhasbecomeaunifyinglanguageinbiology, giving rise to whole new areas of research in computational systems biology. Gene networks are conceptual models of genetic regulation where each gene is considered to be directly affected by a number of other genes, and are usually represented by directed graphs. ∗Dr. Ali Masoudi-Nejad, sole Guest Editor for this paper. Forthcoming in the journal of Seminars for Developmental Cell Biology special issue on Information Theory in Molecular Biology. †Correspondingauthor: hector[dot]zenil[at]algorithmicnaturelab[dot]org 1 5102 ceD 11 ]NM.oib-q[ 7v4063.1041:viXra Classicalinformationtheoryhasforsometimebeenappliedtonetworks,but Shannon entropy, like any other computable measure (i.e. one that is a total function, returning an output in finite time for every input), is not invariant to changes of object description [45]. More recently, algorithmic information theory has been introduced as a tool for use in network theory, and some interesting properties have been found [40, 42,46]. For example, in [40] correlations were reported among algebraic and topologicalpropertiesofsyntheticandbiologicalnetworksbymeansofalgorithmic complexity, and an application to classify networks by type was developed in [42]. We review and explore further these information content approaches for characterizingbiologicalnetworksandnetworksingeneral. Weprovidetheoretical estimations of the error of approximations to the Kolmogorov complexity of graphs and complex networks, offering both exact and numerical approximations. Together with [40] and [42], the methods introduced here represent a novel view and constitute a formal approach to graph complexity, while providing a new set of tools for the analysis of the local and global structure of networks. 1.1 Graph notation and complex networks A graph G is labeled when the vertices are distinguished by names such as u ,u ,...u with n = |V(G)|. Graphs G and H are said to be isomorphic if 1 2 n there is a bijection between the vertex sets of G and H, λ : V(G) → V(H) such that any two vertices u and v ∈ G are adjacent in G if and only if λ(u) and λ(v) are adjacent in H. When G and H are the same graph, the bijection is referred to as an automorphism of G. The adjacency matrix of a graph is not an invariant under graph relabelings. Fig. 1 shows two adjacency matrices for isomorphic graphs. A canonical form of G is a labeled graph Canon(G) that is isomorphic to G, such that every graph that is isomorphic to G has the same canonical form as G. An advantage of Canon(G) is that unlike A(G), A(Canon(G)) is a graph invariant of Canon(G) [1]. One of the most basic properties of graphs is the number of links per node. When all nodes have the same number of links, the graph is said to be regular. The degree of a node v, denoted by d(v), is the number of (incoming and outgoing) links to other nodes. We will also say that a graph is planar if it can be drawninaplanewithoutitsedgescrossing. Planarityisaninterestingproperty because only planar graphs have duals. A dual graph of a planar graph G is a graph that has a vertex corresponding to each face of G, and an edge joining two neighboring faces for each edge in G. Apopulartypeofgraphthathasbeenstudiedistheso-calledErd¨os-R´enyi [12, 14] (ER) graph, in which vertices are randomly and independently connected by links with a fixed probability (also called edge density) (see Fig. 2 for a comparison between a regular and a random graph of the same size). The probability of vertices being connected is called the edge probability. The main characteristicofrandomgraphsisthatallnodeshaveroughlythesamenumber 2 Figure 1: Isomorphic graphs with two different adjacency matrix representations, illustrating that the adjacency matrix is not an invariant of a graph under relabelings. However, similar graphs have adjacency matrices with similar algorithmic information content. Figure 2: Examples of two regular graphs (left and middle) are a 2n circular graph with 20 nodes and a complete graph with 20 nodes, both of whose descriptions are very short, hence K(G) ∼ log|V(G)| ∼ 4.32 bits. In contrast, a random graph (right) with the same number of nodes and number of links requires more information to be specified, because there is no simple rule connecting the nodes and therefore K(G)∼|E(G)|=30 bits. 3 of links, equal to the average number of links per node. A ER graph G(n,p) is a graph of size