of BDM currently covers only discrete data, and Fig. 8 shows that it reverses the ER and the BA networks for this Mendes dataset. This effect can be the result of the ratio of data to noise introduced in the input files for the reconstruction methods in connection to the particular topology of a network, noise which is not present in the gold standard network. Another direction for future research is the extension of BDM to continuous data(bye.g. studyingtheeffectsofdatadiscretization,suchasbinning),which wouldthenallowustocomparethecomplexityofthesimulatedgeneexpression that generates the networks. Theapproachwouldsuggestthatinthetaskofnetworkreverseengineering, where only the gene expression data is known, the complexity of the data may provide a hint which may be useful in recovering/reconstructing the topology of the causal network if it cannot even substitute the need of explicit network inference to understand how the components of a complex system like a living cell interact and regulate each other and how elements influence each other. 10 Conclusions We have surveyed and introduced several concepts and methods at the intersection of network biology, graph theory, complex networks and information theory. We have applied and compared techniques, from Shannon’s entropy to 22 Figure 8: Top: Comparison of histograms of compressibility of the simulated gene expression data files and their underlying networks. The data sets and networks were produced by a Hills equation process. Here we show that compression directly on the data and the networks characterizes their topology. Bottom: BDM, however, classifies ER random networks as less complex than scale free networks, which in principle should not be the case, but the range of applicationofBDMdoesnotcovercontinuousdata,asproducedintheartificial gene expression data files from the Mendes database. 23 Kolmogorov complexity (by way of algorithmic probability and lossless compressibility), that can be used to analyze various aspects and properties of biological networks, techniques serviceable at different scales and for different purposes. Wehaveaimedforanencompassinginformation-theoreticstudyofbiological networks at different scales and for a potentially fruitful interaction between algorithmic information theory and systems biology. Wehaveintroducedtheoreticalandnumericalresultstobefurtherexplored and exploited. We have applied the methods to various networks, and in particulartoartificialgeneexpressiondatafilesandtheirassociatednetworkswith different topologies. The process of data discretization of continuous sources is a topic unto itself. Traditionally, it has been done by binning methods or density estimations. A survey of these techniques is offered in [18]. But in the application of information-theoretic measures to sequences of discretized real valued data, it is important to set values to the same digit precision. In the Mendes database, for example, discretization is achieved by simply truncating the values of the evaluations of the Hill equations. Other important matters to investigate further are the limitations of the measurement process and the sources of noise. Noise is part and parcel of naturally occurring processes, arising either from the measurements themselves or from interactions with other systems. Noise is usually expected to be random (but can be recursive or non-recursive), and it would look random for information-theoretic measures, as it would be alien to the mechanism generating the process of interest that’s being measured. However, the nature of this randomness can be an interlaced recursive signal or a disconnected one, and it willultimatelyhaveanimpactontheapproximationsofcomplexity. Differences in the complexity of different descriptions, as coming, e.g., from the simulated gene expression files in the Mendes network vs. the generated networks themselves, can therefore be due to these factors. For example, truncation for discretization of a continuous process can be both a source of apparent noise or a fundamentallossofimportantinformation. Intheformercase,theKolmogorov complexity of one system relative to the other would increase, and in the latter case it would decrease, thereby in principle empowering the quantification of these phenomena. References [1] L. Babai, E. Luks, Canonical labeling of graphs, Proc. 15th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 171–183, 1983. [2] R. Albert and A.-L. Barab´asi, Statistical mechanics of complex networks, Reviews of Modern Physics, 74, 47, 2002. [3] U. Alon, Network Motifs: theory and experimental approaches, Nature, 450, vol. 8, June 2007. 24 [4] U. Alon, Collection of Complex Networks. Uri Alon Homepage 2007 (accessed on July 2013). http://www.weizmann.ac.il/mcb/UriAlon/ groupNetworksData.html. [5] L.A. Boyer et al. Core transcriptional regulatory circuitry in human embryonic stem cells, Cell 122, 947–956, 2005. [6] H. Buhrman , M. Li , J. Tromp , P. Vit´anyi, Kolmogorov Random Graphs and the Incompressibility Method, SIAM J. Comput, 29(2):590–599, 1999. [7] C.S. Calude, Information and Randomness: An Algorithmic Perspective, EATCS Series, 2nd. edition, 2010, Springer. [8] G.J. Chaitin. On the length of programs for computing finite binary sequences Journal of the ACM, 13(4):547–569, 1966. [9] T.M. Cover and J.A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell, 2009. [10] M. Dehmer, N. Barbarini, K. Varmuza, A. Graber, A Large Scale Analysis of Information-Theoretic Network Complexity Measures Using Chemical Structures. PLoS ONE 4(12): e8057, 2009. [11] J.-P. Delahaye and H. Zenil, Numerical Evaluation of the Complexity of ShortStrings: AGlanceIntotheInnermostStructureofAlgorithmicRandomness, Applied Mathematics and Computation 219, pp. 63–77, 2012. [12] P. Erd¨os, A.