excess entropy (the differences among the entropies for consecutive block sizes). To proceed by means of block entropy is computationally expensive, as compared to fixing the block size to n, as it entails producing all possible overlapping (cid:0)i(cid:1) n substrings for all i∈{1,...,n}. Shannonentropycanalsobeappliedtothenodedegreesequenceofagraph. The Shannon entropy of an unlabeled network as described by its degree distribution can be described by the same formula for Shannon entropy where the random variable is a degree distribution. The chief advantage of so doing being thatitisinvarianttorelabelings. Thisalsomeansthatthedegreedistributionis not a lossless representation of a labeled network (but of its isomorphic group), and is an interesting entropic measure but can only be used when the node 5 labels are not relevant. For example, in a causal recursive network, the node labels may represent time events in a sequence that has a meaning captured in the network labeling, in which case the degree distribution sequence (where no agreement has been reached on the order of the elements in the distribution sequence, which is therefore disordered) cannot be used to reconstruct the original network represented by the unlabeled version or the isomorphism group of the labeled networks. It is also clear that the concept of entropy rate cannot be applied to the degree distribution, because the node degree sequence has no particular order oranyorderismeaninglessbecauseanylabelnumberingwillbearbitrary. This also means that Shannon entropy is not invariant to the description of a network,especiallyasalabeledoranunlabelednetwork,exceptforclearlyextreme cases(e.g. fullydisconnectedandcompletelyconnectednetworksbothhaveflat degreedistributionsandthereforelowestShannonentropybothdegreesequence and adjacency matrix density). A review and comparison of these entropic measures is provided in [10] in connection to applications of drug and chemical structures. An interesting proposal related to algorithmic complexity is a measure of linear matrix complexity [29] based on the number of operations needed to produce a matrix. This is similar to finding the generating basis (a lossless description of a labelled graph) of an adjacency matrix A, such that XM = A with X a proper vector such that XM ≤ A. XM ≤ A is an upper bound to the Kolmogorov complexity if a labelled graph G with adjacency matrix A. Effectively, the null space, kernel or vector space basis that generates the adjacency matrix is a smaller computer program that generates the adjacency matrix. This kind of complexity is linear because the matrix could be reduced to non-linear combinations. Indeed, the nullspace is not the shortest possible program to produce A. 3 Algorithmic information and network biology DNAsequencesstoretheinformationrequiredtoproducetheproteinsneededby living organisms, among other information regulating underlying mechanisms, and are therefore expected to be removed from randomness. Likewise, biological networks carry information, transfer information from one region to another, and implement functions represented by the element’s interactions. Connections among elements in a biological network are therefore removed both from triviality and randomness. In a biological network, nodes usually represent proteins, metabolites, genes, transcription factors, etc. A link represents the interactions between the nodes in a network that can correspond to protein-protein binding interactions, metabolic coupling or regulation. The Shannon entropy (or simply entropy) of a graph G is simply defined by n (cid:88) H(A(G))=− P(A(x ))log P(A(x )) (Eq. 2) i 2 i i=1 6 whereGistherandomvariablewithnpossibleoutcomes(allpossibleadjacency matrices of size |V(G)|). For example, a completely disconnected graph G with alladjacencymatrixentriesequaltozerohasentropyH(A(G))=0,becausethe numberofdifferentsymbolsintheadjacencymatrixis1. However,ifadifferent number of 1s and 0s occur in A(G), then H(A(G))(cid:54)=0. In general we will use Blockentropyinordertodetectmoregraphregularities(throughtheadjacency matrix) at a greater resolution. But for Block entropy there is an extra factor to be taken into account. The unlabeled calculation of the Block entropy (not relevant for 1-bit entropy) of a graph has to take into consideration all possible adjacencymatrixrepresentationsforallpossiblelabelings. Therefore,theBlock entropy of a graph is given by: H(G)=min{H(A(g ))|G ∈L(G)} (Eq. 3) L L where L(G) is the group of all possible labelings of G. Likewise, thedegreeofanodeinabiologicalnetworkofproteininteractions represents the number of proteins with which it interacts, and its Shannon entropy does not require a labeling version because the degree sequence is an invariant of the graph isomorphic group. Other entropic measures of network elements are possible and have been proposed before but they all require to focus on a particular graph element (adjacencymatrix,degreesequence,numberofbifurcations)andtheydonotall convergemeaningthatShannonentropyisnotinvarianttodifferentdescriptions of the same object. Another powerful measure of information content and randomness, with which to find not only statistical but recursive regularities, is the concept of Kolmogorov complexity [8,20]—denoted by K. This is because K has been proven to be a universal measure theoretically guaranteed to asymptotically identify any computable regularity [36], i.e. a regularity that can be reproduced byalgorithmicmeanssuchasacomputerprogramorTuringmachine. Formally, the Kolmogorov complexity of a string s is K(s)=min{|p|:U(p)=s} (Eq. 4) that is, the length (in bits) of the shortest program p that when running on a universal Turing machine U outputs s upon halting. A universal Turing machine U is an abstraction of a general-purpose computer that can be programmed to reproduce any computable object, such as a string or a network (e.g. the elements