with similar algorithmic information content. Figure 2: Examples of two regular graphs (left and middle) are a 2n circular graph with 20 nodes and a complete graph with 20 nodes, both of whose descriptions are very short, hence K(G) ∼ log|V(G)| ∼ 4.32 bits. In contrast, a random graph (right) with the same number of nodes and number of links requires more information to be specified, because there is no simple rule connecting the nodes and therefore K(G)∼|E(G)|=30 bits. 3 of links, equal to the average number of links per node. A ER graph G(n,p) is a graph of size n constructed by connecting nodes randomly with probability p independent from every other edge. Usually ER graphs are assumed to be non-recursive (i.e. truly random), but ER graphs can be constructed recursively with, for example, pseudo-random algorithms. Here we will assume that ER graphs are non-recursive, as theoretical comparisons and bounds hold only in the non-recursive case. For numerical estimations, however, we use a pseudo-random edge connection algorithm, in keeping with common practice. ERrandomgraphshavesomeinterestingproperties,butbiologicalnetworks are not random. They carry information, connections between certain elements in a biological graph are favored or avoided, and not all vertices have the same probabilityofbeingconnectedtoothervertices. Thetwomostpopularcomplex networkmodelsconsistoftwoalgorithmsthatreproducecertaincharacteristics found in empirical networks. Indeed, the field has been driven largely by the observation of properties that depart from properties modeled by regular and random graphs. Specifically, there are two topological properties of many complexnetworksthathavebeenafocusofinterest. Asimple graph isagraphwith no self-loops and no multi-edges. Throughout this paper we will only consider simple graphs. A network is considered a small-world graph G (e.g. see Fig. 3) if the average graph distance D grows no faster than the log of the number of nodes: D ∼logV(G). Manynetworksarescale-free,meaningthattheirdegreesaresize independent, in the sense that the empirical degree distribution is independent of the size of the graph up to a logarithmic term. That is, the proportion of vertices with degree k is proportional to γkτ for some τ >1 and constant γ. In other words, many empirical networks display a power-law degree distribution. Figure3: Forp=0,WS isaregulargraphthatrequireslittleinformationtobe described. For rewiring probability p = 1, WS becomes a random graph that requires about as much information in bits as the number of edges in WS (i.e. K(WS) ∼ |E(WS)|). For p very close to zero, however, the average network distanceamongnodesdropsdramatically,approachingthatoftherandomgraph casewhileremainingoflowcomplexity(littleinformationisrequiredtodescribe K(WS)∼log|V(WS)|+(cid:15)(|V(WS)|)), close to the regular WS for p=0. 4 2 Classical information theory and linear complexity Central to information theory is the concept of Shannon’s information entropy, which quantifies the average number of bits needed to store or communicate a message. Shannon’s entropy determines that one cannot store (and therefore communicate) a symbol with n different symbols in less than log(n) bits. In this sense, Shannon’s entropy determines a lower limit below which no message canbefurthercompressed,noteveninprinciple. Anotherapplication(orinterpretation) of Shannon’s information theory is as a measure for quantifying the uncertainty involvedinpredictingthevalueofarandomvariable. Forexample, specifying the outcome of a fair coin flip (two equally likely outcomes) requires one bit at a time, because the results are independent and therefore each result conveysmaximumentropy. Thingsbegintogetinterestingwhenthecoinisnot fair. If one considers a coin with heads on both obverse and reverse, then the tossing experiment always results in heads, and the message will always be 1 with full ceryainty. For an ensemble X(R,p(x )), where R is the set of possible outcomes (the i randomvariable), n=|R| and p(x )is the probabilityofan outcomeinR. The i Shannon information content or entropy of X is then given by n (cid:88) H(X)=− p(x )log p(x ) (Eq. 1) i 2 i i=1 Which implies that to calculate H(X) one has to know or assume the mass distributionprobabilityofensembleX. OnecaveatregardingShannon’sentropy isthatoneisforcedtomakeanarbitrarychoiceregardinggranularity. Takefor example the bit string 01010101010101. The Shannon entropy of the string at the level of single bits is maximal, as there are the same number of 1s and 0s, but the string is clearly regular when two-bit blocks are taken as basic units, in which instance the string has minimal complexity because it contains only 1 symbol(01)fromamongthe4possibleones(00,01,10,11). Onewaytoovercome this problem is to take into consideration all possible “granularities” (we call this Block entropy), from length 1 to n, where n is the length of the sequence. This measure is related to what’s also called predictive information or excess entropy (the differences among the entropies for consecutive block sizes). To proceed by means of block entropy is computationally expensive, as compared to fixing the block size to n, as it entails producing all possible overlapping (cid:0)i(cid:1) n substrings for all i∈{1,...,n}. Shannonentropycanalsobeappliedtothenodedegreesequenceofagraph. The Shannon entropy of an unlabeled network as described by its degree distribution can be described by the same formula for Shannon entropy where the random variable is a degree distribution. The chief advantage of so doing being thatitisinvarianttorelabelings. Thisalsomeansthatthedegreedistributionis not a lossless representation of a labeled network (but of its isomorphic group), and is an