to specify the end points of every edge. Fig. 6 shows classical and algorithmic complexity approximations of ER random graphs and complete graphs as calculated by three measures: BDM, losslesscompression(Compress)andEntropy(asappliedbothtotheadjacency matrix and to the degree sequences). OntheonehandBDMandCompressestimateK(G)fromabove,converging to a value K(G)/|E(G)| ∼ 1 for ER random graphs and K(G)/log|V(G)| ∼ 0 for complete graphs (with BDM converging faster even if it is less stable due to the block size, and for which the error is therefore estimated, allowing correction). 19 On the other hand, Entropy as applied to adjacency matrices and degree sequences is similar, and conforms to the expected theoretical values. Entropy decreases for random graphs because ER graphs have the same average node degree, and the frequency of non-zero values in their adjacency matrices is 0.5 from the graph density. For complete graphs (with self-loops, hence adjacency matrices with all entries1)andwiththesameV(G)edgespernode,Entropyisclearly1forgrowing adjacency matrix as well as degree sequences. However, it can be seen that degree entropy and adjacency matrix entropy do not always coincide for random graphs, because of the small variance in node degree, while the adjacency matrix retains the exact edge density 0.5. Unlike theoretical values of Kolmogorov complexity, Entropy is therefore less robust as a measure of the complexity of information content, and while it has the advantage of being computable, its chief advantage is that it is not as powerful as Kolmogorov complexity [45]. Figure 6: Numerical approximations (normalized between 0 and 1) for analytically solvable extreme cases: ER random (edge density 0.5) and complete graphs. EntropyvaluesareexactcalculationsbutBDMandCompressareupper bounds of K(G). 8.2 Linear versus algorithmic complexity Based in the ideas of linear complexity described in Section 2, we calculated the matrix rank (the number of linearly independent rows) of a set of regular 20 graphs with different algorithmic complexity (as calculated by BDM) to find the expected correlation as shown in Fig. 7. Figure 7: Log-log correlation plot from almost 3000 graphs from the GraphData[] repository in Wolfram Mathematica v.10 (including graphs) with node count between 20 and 200. confirming the expectation of correlation between numerical approximations to algorithmic complexity and the rank of adjacency matrices of regular graphs with different low algorithmic information content. Thelinearfittingline(inred)is37.78+18.7xandthePearsoncorrelationis0.39 with p-value 2.8×10−108. When normalizing by graph size (node count), the correlation is still strong with a fitting line 1.44+19.15x, Pearson correlation 0.185 and p-value 6.51×10−24. 9 Algorithmic complexity of synthetic data and artificial networks Taking advantage of the robustness of Kolmogorov complexity as asymptotic invariant to different descriptions of an object (e.g. a network versus the data fromwhichthenetworkisconstructede.g. geneexpression), wecanattemptto findifthereisanumericalcorrespondenceofthecomplexityvaluesofequivalent objects. The Mendes dataset [26] is a common and widely used set of artificial gene networks for the objective comparison of network reconstruction analyses. In the database there are files emulating microarrays of gene expression data from interactions determined by particular topological and kinetic properties. These networks are embodied in kinetic models designed to produce synthetic gene expression data used for in silico experiments. 21 The networks consist of three sets of 100 genes, with eachsethaving 200interactions. TheyareclassifiedasErd¨os-R´enyirandomnetworks(ER),scale-free networks (SF), as defined by Barab´asi-Albert’s preferential attachment algorithm, and small world or Watts-Strogatz networks (WS), depending on which ofthethreetopologieswasemployedtogeneratethedataandthenetworks. The MendesmodelsuseamultiplicativeHillkineticstoapproximatetranscriptional interactions determined by the following differential equation: dx i =a (cid:89) NI 1K j nj (cid:89) NA (1+ Am l l )−b x dt i 1Knj +Inj AKml +Aml i i j=1 j j l=1 l l where x is the concentration (expression) of the i-th gene, N and N are the i I A number of upstream inhibitors and activators respectively, and their concentrations are I and A . All other parameters are specified and explained in [26]. j I There is one differential equation for each gene in the network following the behavior of Hill kinetics. The data files in the Mendes database are produced by the Hill Kinetics differential equations for which the networks were designed. Hence a correspondence between the complexity of gene expression data in the files and the networks may be expected. Fig. 8 shows how compressibility and BDM can be appliedtotheseobjects,namely,datasetscontainingsimulatedgeneexpression (realvalues)data,andhowapplyingcompressibilityclassifiesdataandnetworks in agreement with each other. The expectation would be to see a natural correspondence between the time series’ complexity and the networks’ complexity. However, the range of application of BDM currently covers only discrete data, and Fig. 8 shows that it reverses the ER and the BA networks for this Mendes dataset. This effect can be the result of the ratio of data to noise introduced in the input files for the reconstruction methods in connection to the particular topology of a network, noise which is not present in the gold standard network. Another direction for future research is the extension of BDM to continuous data(bye.g. studyingtheeffectsofdatadiscretization,suchasbinning),which wouldthenallowustocomparethecomplexityofthesimulatedgeneexpression that generates the networks. Theapproachwouldsuggestthatinthetaskofnetworkreverseengineering, where only the gene expression data is known, the complexity of the data may provide