3.2 Kolmogorov complexity of unlabeled graphs As shown in [40], estimations of Kolmogorov complexity are able to distinguish complex from random networks (of the same size, or growing asymptotically), which are both in turn distinguished from regular graphs (also of the same size). K calculated by the BDM assigns low Kolmogorov complexity to regular graphs, medium complexity to complex networks following Watts-Strogatz or Barab´asi-Albert algorithms, and higher Kolmogorov complexity to random networks. That random graphs are the most algorithmically complex is clear from a theoretical point of view: nearly all long binary strings are algorithmically random, and so nearly all random unlabeled graphs are algorithmically random[6],whereKolmogorovcomplexityisusedtogiveaproofofthenumber ofunlabeledgraphsasafunctionofitsrandomnessdeficiency(howfaritisfrom the maximum value of K(G)). The Coding Theorem Method (CTM) [11,34] is rooted in the relation provided by algorithmic probability between frequency of production of a string from a random program and its Kolmogorov complexity (Eq. (6). It is also called the algorithmic Coding theorem, to contrast it with another coding theorem in classical information theory). Essentially it uses the fact that the more frequent a string (or object), the lower its Kolmogorov complexity; and strings of lower frequency have higher Kolmogorov complexity. In [40], numerical evidence was provided in support of the theoretical assumptionthat theKolmogorovcomplexity ofan unlabeledgraphshould notbe far removed from that of any of its labeled versions. This is because there is a small computer program of fixed size that should determine the order of the labeling proportional to the size of the isomorphism group. Indeed, when the 9 isomorphism group is large, the labeled networks have more equivalent descriptions given by the symmetries, and would therefore, according to algorithmic probability, be of lower Kolmogorov complexity. 3.3 Reconstructing K from local graph algorithmic patterns Theapproachtodeterminingthealgorithmiccomplexityofagraphthusinvolves consideringhowoftentheadjacencymatrixofamotifisgeneratedbyarandom Turing machine on a 2-dimensional array, also called a termite or Langton’s ant [21]. We call this the Block Decomposition Method (BDM) as it requires the partition of the adjacency matrix of a graph into smaller matrices using which we can numerically calculate its algorithmic probability by running a large set of small 2-dimensional deterministic Turing machines, and then, by applyingthealgorithmicCodingtheorem,itsKolmogorovcomplexity. Thenthe overallcomplexityoftheoriginaladjacencymatrixisthesumofthecomplexity of its parts, albeit with a logarithmic penalization for repetitions, given that n repetitions of the same object only adds logn to its overall complexity, as one can simply describe a repetition in terms of the multiplicity of the first occurrence. Moreformally,theKolmogorovcomplexityofalabeledgraphGby means of BDM is defined as follows: (cid:88) K (G,d)= log (n )+K (r ) (1) BDM 2 u m u (ru,nu)∈A(G)d×d where K (r ) is the approximation of the Kolmogorov complexity of the subm u arrays r arrived at by using the algorithmic Coding theorem (Eq. (6)), while u A(G) represents the set with elements (r ,n ), obtained by decomposing d×d u u the adjacency matrix of G into non-overlapping squares of size d by d. In each (r ,n ) pair, r is one such square and n its multiplicity (number of occuru u u u rences). From now on K (g,d = 4) will be denoted only by K(G), but BDM it should be taken as an approximation to K(G) unless otherwise stated (e.g. when taking the theoretical true K(G) value). Once CTM is calculated, BDM can be implemented as a lookup table, and hence runs efficiently in linear time for non-overlapping fixed size submatrices. As with Block entropy (c.f. Section 3), the Kolmogorov complexity of a graph G is given by: K(cid:48)(G)=min{K(A(G ))|G ∈L(G)} (Eq. 8) L L where L(G) is the group of all possible labelings of G and G a particular L labeling. In fact K(G) provides a choice for graph canonization, taking the adjacency matrix of G with the lowest Kolmogorov complexity. Because it may not be unique, it can be combined with the smallest lexicographical representation when the adjacency matrix is concatenated by rows, as is traditionally done for graph canonization. 10 By taking subarrays of the adjacency matrix we ensure that network motifs (overrepresented graphs), used in biology and proven to classify superfamilies of networks [3,27], are taken into consideration in the BDM calculation. And indeed, we were able to show that BDM alone classifies the same superfamilies of networks [42] that classical network motifs were able to identify. Of course the time complexity of the calculation of K(cid:48)(G) is a matter of concern. The graph isomorphism problem involves constructing an ‘efficient’ (subexponential)algorithmfortestingwhethertwogivengraphsareisomorphic. ThegraphisomorphismproblemisbelievedtobeinNP.Theproblemoftesting labeled graphs for isomorphism is polynomially equivalent to the graph isomorphism problem, and therefore the calculation of K(cid:48)(G) cannot be expected to have a polynomial time algorithm. We will see, however, that |K(G)−K(cid:48)(G)| is bounded by a constant independent of G. 4 Small patterns in biological networks One important development in network biology is the concept of network motifs [4,39], defined as recurrent and statistically significant sub-graphs found in networks, as compared to a uniform