the four ThenexttaskistolinktheArabidopsismodelformally measurablechemicals,thevectorxrepresentsthevec- to reality [6, 7, 15]. The Bayesian paradigm allows us torofrateparametersasbeforeand trepresentstime. torepresentscientificjudgementsasprobabilisticspecWe are mainly interested in matching the observed ificationsor,ifwefollowtheBayesLinearapproach,as trends which are often specified as ratios to wild type. expectationandvariancestatements[39].Aswedonot Therefore we choose to work with the log ratio of have access to the precise quantitative values for the model outputs, as these will be more robust and allow observations z i that feature in equation 3, we instead multiplicative error statements. We also equate these proposevaluesfortheobservations,observationerrors trends to the output of the model at equilibrium [30], Var(e i )andmodeldiscrepancyVar((cid:15) i )thatareconsisthat is for t→∞, and hence we define the main out- tentbothwiththeobservedtrendsgivenintable4and puts of interest to be with expert judgement concerning the accuracy of the modelandtherelevantexperiments.Wedothisfortwo (cid:26) (cid:27) h (x,t) reasons: firstly to demonstrate that our approach can f (x) = lim log j,a2 (22) i t→∞ h j,a1 (x,t) be reasonably applied to situations where only qualitativedataisavailable,andsecondlytohighlightwhat where the subscript i indexes the elements of the list kinds of analysis are possible if quantitative measure- {j,a ,a } corresponding to the 16 trends that were ments are actually available across all the outputs of 1 2 actually measured, as presented in table 4. It is this interest, hence motivating more detailed future data function f (x) that will be directly compared to the collection. There are several possible ways to assess i Vernonetal. Page17of30 Trendrelativetowildtypewithnofeeding Trendrelativetoplsmutantwithnofeeding (k6=0.3,IAA=ACC=cytokinin=0) (k6=0,IAA=ACC=cytokinin=0) Chemical plsmutant FeedAuxin FeedEthylene FeedCytokinin plsmutant+FeedEthylene Output (k6=0) (IAA=1) (ACC=1) (cytokinin=1) (k6=0andACC=1) Auxin Down Up Up Down Down PLSm - Up Down Down - ET Nochange Up Up Up - CK Up Down Down Up - Table4 Summariesofthedirectionofobservedtrendsofthefourmeasurablechemicals,relativetowildtypeforthefourtypesof experiment:plsmutant,feedingauxin,ethyleneandcytokininrespectively(firstfourcolumns).Thefinalcolumngivesthetrendforthe caseoffeedingethylenetotheplsmutant,relativetotheplsmutantwithnofeeding.Seethetextandalso[30]formoredetailonthe sizeandrelateduncertaintiesforeachofthemeasuredtrends. these quantities while conserving consistency with the givenastheblackerrorbars,onalogscale.Alsoshown observed trends. We choose a conservative, minimal (as the first two errors bars from the left) are the two approach, and specify for the “Up”, “Down” and “No additional non-ratio wildtype outputs for Auxin and Change” trends that z =1.24,−1.24 and 0, and that Cytokinin, which are given reasonably wide intervals i σ = 0.35,0.35 and 0.061 respectively, where σ rep- of 0.24 plus or minus an order of magnitude [30]. i i resents the combined model discrepancy and observed The specification of z ,Var(e ) and Var((cid:15) ) or equivi i i errors alentlyσ ,canbeusedtodefinean‘acceptablematch’ i between model output and observed data via the im- (cid:112) σ = Var((cid:15) )+Var(e ). (23) plausibility measures of equation (18), as any model i i i evaluation that satisfies I (x) < c for some cutoff c. i Thesecombinedspecificationshavebeenmadesothat A common choice is c = 3, based on Pukelsheim’s 3the intervals sigma rule (see [47]). We may impose this constraint simultaneously across all of the 18 outputs shown in z ± 3σ (24) figure7,bydemandingthatI (x)<cwhereI (x)is i i M M the maximum implausibility defined by equation (19), represent an increase of between 20% to ten fold for or we could impose a less stringent criteria by conthe “Up” trends, a decrease also of between 20% to straining the second or third maximum implausibility tenfoldforthe“Down”trends,andanintervalof40% instead,whichwouldallowmodelrunstodeviatefrom decrease to 40% increase for the “No Change” trend. one or two outputs respectively. These intervals, assumed symmetric on the log scale, were formulated by answering the natural question: Bayesian emulation of the Arabidopsis model where would each model output have to lie to avoid We can now proceed with the first wave of emulation violating the trends given in table 4, considering rele- of the Arabidopsis model as follows. Note that several vantobservationalandmodeluncertainties?Thisspec- packagesareavailablethatperformstandardGaussian ification captures the main features of the trend data Process emulation (see for example the BACCO [62] andissufficientforourpurposesofdemonstratingthe and GPfit [63] packages in R, or GPy [64] for Python) Bayesian history matching methodology. Obviously, a which may be of use to the uninitiated, as an altermore detailed treatment would involve having more native to the slightly more sophisticated emulators we information regarding the observations z themselves, describe here. i and their associated measurement errors represented First we design a set of 2000 wave 1 runs over the byVar(e ).Also,werewetoconsiderinmoredetailthe initial search region X based on a maximin Latin hyi 1 known deficiencies of the model, we could give a more percube design (see figure 3 and [34, 35]), using for detailedspecificationofthemodeldiscrepancyVar((cid:15) ), example the lhs() function in R [37]. Each of these i which would most likely include correlations between runs specifies a distinct set of values of all the rate differentoutputsthatexploitedthejointstructuresug- parameters in x, and therefore for each run the difgestedbythechoiceofchemical,choiceofmutantand ferential equations given in table 1 were solved nuchoice of feeding regime, or even including a simple merically using the lsoda() function again in R, with dependence on certain input parameters. See [6], [16] initial conditions given in table 3, up to t = 10000 and [8] for examples of more detailed model discrep- seconds