insight into variability and the tolerance we place on the model’s the model’s structure and, thanks to its speed, it can accuracy, known as the model discrepancy. It is vital be used to help perform the global parameter search thatweperformaglobalparametersearchforallinput far more efficiently than approaches that just use the parameter settings that achieve an acceptable match. comparativelyslowscientificmodelitself(forexamples This is because a single solution for the rate parame- see [6, 8, 11–14]). ter values may suggest certain biological implications Manyanalysesandcorrespondingparametersearches andgiveparticularpredictionsforfutureexperiments, still fail because an appropriate measure of an acceptboth of which could be gravely misleading were we to able match between model and reality is not defined. explore the parameter space further and find several This can lead to the use of badly behaved objective alternative solutions that give radically different im- functions that do not properly capture the desired plications and predictions. This is a mistake that is match criteria, and which are often harder to exdisturbingly common. plore in high dimensions, due to increased numbers of Unfortunately,performingglobalparametersearches ridges, spikes and local minima. The Bayesian emulaover high dimensional spaces can be extremely chal- tion methodology we introduce naturally incorporates lengingforseveralreasons,mostnotably:(a)thecom- more detailed statistical models of the difference beplexstructureofthemodelandhencethecomplexway tweenthemodeloutputsandtheobserveddata,which it imposes constraints on the parameters, (b) the sub- allowtheinclusionofimportantsourcesofuncertainty stantial model evaluation time relative to the needs of suchasobservationalerrorandmodeldiscrepancy,the theanalysis,(c)theneedforacarefulassessmentofan later being the upfront acknowledgement of the lim- “acceptablematch”thatincorporatesappropriatelyall itations of the current model. Various structures of the complexities and uncertainties of the comparison increasing complexity are available for the representabetween the model and the real system, and (d) high tion of these uncertainties, depending on the requiredimensionalspaces,beingextremelylarge,requirevast ments and importance of the study (see [6, 15–18] for numbersofmodelevaluationstoexplore.Forexample, examples and discussion). some spatial models of root development [5] require It is worth noting that due to their speed, the use of at least several minutes for a single evaluation. It is emulatorswouldgreatlyimprovetheefficiencyofmany worth considering how large high dimensional spaces formsofanalysisthatamodellermaywishtoperform, are: were we just to evaluate the model in question at e.g. for a fully Bayesian MCMC analysis [9, 19, 20] or the corners of the initial input space, in say 32 dimen- formoredirectglobalparametersearchessuchas[21]. sions, we would require 232 (cid:39) 4.3 billion evaluations, However for high dimensional models, the particuwhichwouldtakeapproximately136yearsifthemodel lar strategy chosen for a parameter search is vital. took 1 second per evaluation. However, global param- Many approaches struggle due to being trapped in loetersearchesareessentialforanymeaningfulinference cal minima (of which there may be many) or because or prediction to be made about the biological system. they chase the scientifically spurious best match paTherefore this represents a fundamental challenge for rameter setting. Here, we describe an efficient global the whole of systems biology. This article describes parameter search method known as Bayesian history practical methodology to address this problem, based matching, which has proved very successful across a onBayesianstatisticsmethodologyfortheuncertainty wide range of scientific disciplines including cosmolanalysis of complex models [6–9]. ogy[6,7,15,22–24],epidemiology[11,25],oilreservoir Vernonetal. Page3of30 modelling [8, 26–28], climate modelling [12], environ- methodology: linking the model to reality, Bayesian mental science [16] and traffic modelling [29]. emulation, and history matching, before going on to It utilises Bayesian emulators to reduce efficiently comparethestrengthsandweaknessesofBayesianhisthe input parameter space in iterations or waves, by tory matching to more standard approaches. In the identifying regions that are implausible as matches to Results and Discussion section we describe in detail the observed data, with the objective of identifying the application of this methodology to the full 32 diall acceptable input parameter settings. It is a careful mensionalArabidopsismodel,anddiscusstherelevant approach that avoids many of the traps of common insights and biological implications obtained. parameter search techniques. Methods Hormonal crosstalk network in Arabidopsis root Simple 1-dimensional exponential example development Here we introduce a simple 1-dimensional exponenUnderstanding how hormones and genes interact to tial toy model example which we will use to illustrate coordinate plant growth is a major challenge in de- our definitions of all the parts of a typical systems bivelopmental biology. The activities of auxin, ethylene ology analysis, for example, the model, the input or and cytokinin depend on the cellular context and ex- rate parameters, observations with errors, model dishibit either synergistic or antagonistic interactions. crepancy,Bayesianemulators,implausibilitymeasures Previously,threeofourauthorsdevelopedahormonal and history matching. Specifically, this 1-dimensional crosstalk network for a single Arabidopsis cell by iter- examplewillbeusedthroughoutthisMethodssection atively combining modelling with experimental anal- to demonstrate each of the three main parts of our ysis [30]. Kinetic modelling was used to analyse how approach: such a network regulates auxin concentration in the • Linking the model to reality Arabidopsis root, by controlling the relative contribu- • Bayesian Emulation tionofauxininflux,biosynthesisandefflux;andbyin- • History matching: a global parameter search tegratingauxin,ethyleneandcytokininsignalling[30]. Although some of the parameters in the model were Sayweareinterestedintheconcentrationofachembased on experimental data, most parameters were ical which evolves in time. We represent this concenchosen in an ad hoc way, by adjusting them to fit