the input space. For exAi low order polynomials, and β are unknown scalar amplewemayuseamaximinLatinhypercubedesign, ij regression coefficients. The second term, u (x ) is a anapproximatelyorthogonaldesignwhichattemptsto i Ai Gaussian process over x (or in a less fully speci- ensure there are no large holes in-between the run loAi fiedversion,aweaklysecondorderstationarystochas- cations(seefigure3and[34–36]).AnnpointLatinhytic process), which means that if we choose a finite percubedesigniscreatedbydividingtherangeofeach set of inputs {x(1),...,x(s)}, the uncertain outputs inputintonsub-intervals,andplacingpointstoensure Ai Ai there is only ever one point in each sub-interval (this u (x(1)),...,u (x(s)) will have a multivariate normal i Ai i Ai can be done using the lhs() function in R [37]). Many distributionwithacovariancematrixconstructedfrom such Latin hypercube designs are generated and the anappropriatelychosencovariancefunction,forexamone with maximum minimum distance between points ple: is chosen. Wethenfittheemulatorgivenbyequation(5)tothe Cov(u (x ),u (x(cid:48) ))=σ2 exp (cid:26) − (cid:107)x Ai −x(cid:48) Ai (cid:107)2(cid:27) (6) set of model runs using our favourite statistical tools, i Ai i Ai ui θ2 guided by expert judgement. Specifically we would i prefer a fully Bayesian approach if we required full where σ2 and θ are the variance and correlation probability distributions [9], and a Bayes Linear aplengthof u u i (x )w i hichmustbespecified[6].Thethird proach [38, 39], which we will describe below, if we rei Ai quired purely expectations, variances and covariances term w (x) is a nugget, a white noise process uncorrei off(x).Wemakecertainpragmaticchoicesintheemulated with β , u (x ) and itself such that ij i Ai lator construction process, for example, while we keep (cid:26) σ2 if x=x(cid:48) the regression coefficients β ij uncertain, we may diCov(w i (x),w i (x(cid:48)))= 0 wi otherwise (7) rectly specify σ u 2 i , σ w 2 i and θ i a priori, or use suitable plugin estimates [6]. TheemulatorsthenprovideanexpectationandvariwithexpectationzeroandVar(w (x))=σ2 ,thatrepi wi anceforthevalueoff(x)atanunexploredinputpoint resentstheeffectsoftheremaininginactiveinputvari- x.Wecantesttheemulatorsusingaseriesofdiagnosables [6]. tics, for example checking their prediction accuracy The emulator, as given by equation (5), possesses overanewbatchofruns[40].See[10]foranintroducvarious desirable features. The regression term, given tion and [6, 7, 9] for detailed descriptions of emulator (cid:80) by β g (x ), is often chosen to represent say a construction. j ij ij Ai thirdorderpolynomialintheactiveinputs.Thiswould While there are several approaches to emulator conattempt to mimic the large scale global behaviour of struction, our preferred choice is to use Bayes Linear the function f (x), and in many cases, will capture a methods,whichisamoretractableversionofBayesian i large proportion of the model’s structure. (It is worth statistics which requires a far simpler prior specificanotingthatreasonablyaccurateemulatorscanoftenbe tionandanalysis[38,39].Itdealspurelywithexpectaconstructed just using regression models, for example tions, variances and covariances of all uncertain quanusing the lm() function in R. This can be a sensible tities, and uses the following update equations to adfirst step, before one attempts the construction of a just our beliefs in the light of new data. Say we had full emulator of the form given in equation (5).) The performed an initial wave of n runs at input locations secondtermu (x ),theGaussianprocess,mimicsthe x(1),x(2),...,x(n) giving a column vector of model local behaviou i r o A f i f i (x) and specifically its local devi- output values D i = (f i (x(1)),f i (x(2)),...,f i (x(n)))T, where i labels the model output. We obtain the adations from the third order polynomial given by the justedexpectationandvarianceforf (x)atnewinput regression terms. We can choose the list of active in- i point x using: putsx usingvariousstatisticaltechniquesforexamAi ple, classical linear model fitting criteria such as AIC E (f (x))= (8) orBIC[6].Alistofsaypactiveinputsforaparticular Di i output f (x) means that we have reduced the input E(f (x))+Cov(f (x),D )Var(D )−1(D −E(D )) i i i i i i i dimension from d to p dimensions, which can result in Var (f (x))= (9) Di i largeefficiencygains.Thesmallremainingeffectofthe Var(f (x))−Cov(f (x),D )Var(D )−1Cov(D ,f (x)) inactive inputs is captured by the third term w (x) in i i i i i i i equation (5). Vernonetal. Page8of30 l l l l l l l l 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 8.0 6.0 4.0 2.0 Input parameter x1 2x retemarap tupnI l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 8.0 6.0 4.0 2.0 Input parameter x1 2x retemarap tupnI Figure3 MaximumminimumdistanceLatinhypercubedesignsofsizen=8(leftpanel)andn=20(rightpanel).Thebluepoints representlocationsinrateorinputparameterspacewherewewouldrunthefullsystemsbiologymodel.Thesedesignsareboth spacefillingandapproximatelyorthogonal,bothdesirablefeaturesforfittingemulators.Notethattheconstructionprocessofa Latinhypercubeensuresthatthereisabluepointwithineachofthensubintervalsofbothinputs,ensuringexcellentcoverage. All quantities on the right hand side of equations (8) to zero, and hence the emulator equation (5) reduces and (9) can be calculated from equations (5) and (6) to combinedwithpriorspecificationsforE(β ),Var(β ), ij ij σ2 , σ2 and θ . Note that we could have used the enui wi i f(x) = β +u(x) (11) tirecollectionofmodeloutputsD ={D ,D ,...,D } 0 1 2 q instead of just D in equations (8) and (9), if we had i specified a more complex, multivariate emulator [41]. Forsimplicitywetreattheconstanttermβ asknown 0 E (f (x))andVar (f (x))areuseddirectlyinthe Di i Di i and hence set Var(β 0 ) =