of acceptable runs have relatively regions.OurBayesianhistorymatchingapproachhow- largek /k ,whileforthek >0modelmuchsmaller 2 1a 2c ever is specifically designed to combat such difficulties and more realistic values are preferred. Second, bioby carefully exploring the space using efficient emula- logically k /k should be small. This is because it is 3a 1a tor based global search methods, as we have demon- knownthatauxinmorepredominantlytransportsfrom strated here. shoot to root, to form an auxin concentration maxiAfter considering that the PLS gene is required for mum in the root tip [66, 67]. However, for the k =0 2c the response of ethylene downstream based on exper- modeltomatchtargetdata,thesetofacceptableruns imental observations (mathematically this is equiva- suggestthatrelativelylargek /k isrequired.There3a 1a lent to the response of ethylene downstream, X, re- fore, the differences between the two models’ paramemaining constant for the pls mutant (k =0) fed with ter ratios highlight that, although we have found ac6 ethylene),previousresearch[30]deducedthatthePLS ceptablematchesforthek =0model,thesematches 2c gene does indeed have a function in auxin biosynthe- have not been found at biologically realistic paramesis. However, the history match of the k = 0 model tervalues.Whilewemustbecautiousaboutsuchcon2c (figure12)suggeststhat,giventhespecificationofthe clusions that are based on the finite sampling of the trends and their relevant uncertainties, the k = 0 non-implausible regions, we have generated hundreds 2c model is consistent with observed data, and hence it of approximately uniformly sampled acceptable runs may not be essential for the PLS gene to play a role from each model that do indeed exhibit the features in auxin biosynthesis. discussed.Thereforeourresultssuggestthatbiological However, examining the differences between the two insightclearlyfavoursthemodelwithk >0,i.e.that 2c modelsrevealssomeinterestingresults.Figure13sum- thePLSgenedoeshaveafunctioninauxinbiosynthemarises the history match results of both the k > 0 sis. More detailed measurements of the key outputs 2c and k = 0 models. It shows a comparison of the that restrict k /k and k /k would of course fur2c 2 1a 3a 1a spread of input parameter locations of the acceptable ther clarify this issue. Vernonetal. Page26of30 ) ( x f = dnert goL i 01 5 0 5− tw_nixuA tw_KC um_nixuA af_nixuA ef_nixuA cf_nixuA efum_nixuA um_TE af_TE ef_TE cf_TE um_KC af_KC ef_KC cf_KC af_mSLP ef_mSLP cf_mSLP Wave 1 Wave 3 Wave 5 l Observed Data Prev. Run l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l Figure12 Theresultsfromthehistorymatchofthek2c=0model,showingthewaves1,3and5runsasthepurple,greenandred linesrespectively,forthe18modeloutputsofinterest.Weseethatalargenumberofacceptablewave5runshavebeenfoundthat matchthetargetdata(theblackerrorbars)andhencethatthereducedk2c=0modelisstillconsistentwiththespecified observationaldata,withinasmallregionoftheinputspace.Comparisonwithfigure10showsthemaindifferencesbetweenthetwo models,mostnoticeablyintheAuxin mufeoutput(7therrorbarfromtheleft)forwhichthevastmajorityoftheinputspacereturns anincorrectpositivetrendforthek2c=0model,ascanbeseenbythelargenumberofwave1and3linesabovezero,withonlya smallandhencehardtofindregionreturningthecorrectnegativetrend.Thek2c>0modelconversely,alwaysreturnsthecorrect negativetrend. Our results show that Bayesian emulation and his- of ethylene downstream when feeding ethylene, etr1 tory matching methodology can be used to evaluate mutant and etr1-pls double mutant, on the evaluation regulatory relationships and gene functions in hor- ofregulatoryrelationshipsandgenefunctions.Fourth, monal signalling systems. To further improve the ac- Bayesian emulation methodology should also be used curacy of the results of this methodology, the follow- to explore the effects of the uncertainty of quantitaing aspects should be considered. First, experimen- tive trends on the evaluation of regulatory relationtal data should be more quantitatively measured, to ships and gene functions, as in most cases trends of define more accurate trends. The example trends we biological data are not sufficiently quantitative. have used in this work, as summarised in table 4 and theassociateddiscussion,aremainlyformulatedbased Conclusions onqualitativeorsemi-quantitativeexperimentaldata, combinedwithscientificjudgement.Second,modelde- Wehaveprovidedanintroductiontothestudyofcomvelopment should include more components, to better plex systems biology models using Bayes linear uncerdescribe the experimental systems. Third, Bayesian tainty analysis. This represents a possible solution to emulation methodology should be used to study the the fundamental challenge that faces systems biology effects of additional experiments, such as the response in terms of the necessity of global parameter searches Vernonetal. Page27of30 l l l ll l ll l l l l lll l l ) ( retemarap tupni gol 01 3 2 1 0 1− 2− 3− l l l ll l ll l l l l lll l l 3 2 1 0 1− 2− 3− l l l l lll ll ll 3 2 1 0 1− 2− 3− 1k a1k/2k a1k/a2k b2k a1k/3k a1k/a3k 4k/5k a6k 7k 8k/9k a01k 11k 21k/a21k 21k/31k 41k/51k 61k/a61k 61k/71k 81k a81k/91k a1k/nixuav1k a81k/KCv1k 21k/htev1k k2c > 0 Case k2c = 0 Case Range Explored Previous Value Figure13 Acomparisonofthespreadofinputparameterlocationsoftheacceptablerunsfoundforthek2c>0model(red boxplots)andthek2c=0model(blueboxplots)intermsofindividualinputsaslabelledalongthex-axis.Notethatthetwosetsof acceptablerunsbeingcomparedcorrespondtotheredlinesinfigures10and12respectively.They-axisisonalog scale,andthe 10 greyrectanglesshowtheinitialrangesthatdefinetheoriginalsearchregionX1 asgivenintable2.Thelightbluehorizontallines showtheinputparametervaluesofthepreviousbestrunasfoundby[30].Wecanseethatsomeinputs,forexample,k1,areeither unconstrainedbytheobserveddata,orpossiblythatchangesintheseinputscanbecompensatedbyappropriatechangesinother inputs.Someinputssuchask16a/k16 arehighlyconstrained,whileotherssuchask2/k1a,k 2b ,k3/k1a andk3a/k1a showclear differencesbetweenthek2c>0andk2c=0models,withthelattermodelpreferringhighervaluesofk2/k1a andk3a/k1a and lowervaluesofk 2b andk3/k1a. of high dimensional models. Our approach features ment model, and in each case identified the small rethree main aspects: gionofinputspacecontainingscientificallyinteresting • A more formal statistical model linking the bio- matches. The two models and their biological implilogicalmodeltoreality,whichencompassesmajor cations were then compared in a robust manner and sourcesofuncertaintysuchasobservationalerrors usedtodiscussgenefunctions.Wefoundthatalthough and model discrepancy. some acceptable matches to the specified trends could • A Bayesian emulator allowing a very fast explobe found for the k =0 model, these were only found ration of model behaviour, applicable to models 2c at parameter settings that violated other known bioeven with very long evaluation times. logical evidence, whereas the k > 0