Vernonetal. METHODOLOGY ARTICLE Bayesian uncertainty analysis for complex systems biology models: emulation, global parameter searches and evaluation of gene functions. Ian Vernon1*, Junli Liu2†, Michael Goldstein1, James Rowe3, Jen Topping2 and Keith Lindsey2ˆ Abstract Background: Many mathematical models have now been employed across every area of systems biology. These models increasingly involve large numbers of unknown parameters, have complex structure which can result in substantial evaluation time relative to the needs of the analysis, and need to be compared to observed data of various forms. The correct analysis of such models usually requires a global parameter search, over a high dimensional parameter space, that incorporates and respects the most important sources of uncertainty. This can be an extremely difficult task, but it is essential for any meaningful inference or prediction to be made about any biological system. It hence represents a fundamental challenge for the whole of systems biology. Results: Bayesian statistical methodology for the uncertainty analysis of complex models is introduced, which is designed to address the high dimensional global parameter search problem. Bayesian emulators that mimic the systems biology model but which are extremely fast to evaluate are embeded within an iterative history match: an efficient method to search high dimensional spaces within a more formal statistical setting, while incorporating major sources of uncertainty. The approach is demonstrated via application to a model of hormonal crosstalk in Arabidopsis root development, which has 32 rate parameters, for which we identify the sets of rate parameter values that lead to acceptable matches between model output and observed trend data. The multiple insights into the model’s structure that this analysis provides are discussed. The methodology is applied to a second related model, and the biological consequences of the resulting comparison, including the evaluation of gene functions, are described. Conclusions: Bayesian uncertainty analysis for complex models using both emulators and history matching is shown to be a powerful technique that can greatly aid the study of a large class of systems biology models. It both provides insight into model behaviour and identifies the sets of rate parameters of interest. Keywords: parameter search; kinetic models; emulation; Bayesian uncertainty analysis; Arabidopsis; root development; hormonal signalling Background biology is to analyse and predict how functions in Fundamental challenges facing systems biology cellsemergefrominteractionsbetweenmolecularcomRecent advances in genome sequencing techniques, a ponents. Computational and mathematical modelling variety of ‘omic’ techniques and bioinformatic anal- provide compelling tools to study the nonlinear dyyses, have led to an explosion of systems-wide bio- namics of these complex interactions [1]. A particulogical data. Thus, identification of molecular compo- lar example is kinetic modelling, in which the kinetnents at the genome scale based on biological data ics of each biological reaction are described in accorhas become possible. However, a major challenge in dance with the corresponding biological process, and thepropertiesofthewholesystemaredescribedusing *Correspondence:i.r.vernon@durham.co.uk differentialequations:acommontoolforanalysingbi1DepartmentofMathematicalSciences,DurhamUniversity,SouthRoad, DH13LE,Durham,UK ological systems [2–4]. Fulllistofauthorinformationisavailableattheendofthearticle A critical problem found in the mathematical mod- †Jointcorrespondingauthor:junli.liu@durham.ac.uk, elling of many complex biological systems, which is ˆmichael.goldstein@durham.ac.uk,J.H.Rowe@sheffield.ac.uk, j.f.topping@durham.ac.uk,keith.lindsey@durham.ac.uk. of particular severity in kinetic modelling, is that the 8102 naJ 21 ]NM.oib-q[ 2v85360.7061:viXra Vernonetal. Page2of30 models often contain large numbers of uncertain pa- Bayesian emulation and uncertainty analysis rameters (a common type being reaction rate param- The issues surrounding the analysis of complex modeters). In most cases, such kinetic parameters cannot els under uncertainty, and specifically the global pabedirectlymeasuredasexperimentstypicallymeasure rameter search problem, are not unique to systems concentrations rather than rates. Even when such pa- biology, and have been encountered in many differrameters can be measured ‘directly’, this is usually in entscientificdisciplines.AnareaofBayesianstatistics experimentalconditionsthataresignificantlydifferent has arisen to meet the demand of such analyses. This fromthecellularenvironmentwewishtostudy.There- area, sometime referred to as the uncertainty analyfore, we have to compare the mathematical model’s sis of computer models, centres around the construcoutputs with experimental observations, often in the tionofBayesianemulators[6–9].Anemulatorisastaform of measured concentrations and trends, and de- tistical construct that mimics the scientific model in termine which values of the input or rate parameters question, providing predictions of the model outputs will achieve an acceptable match between model and with associated uncertainty, at as yet unevaluated inreality. This involves consideration of several sources put parameter settings. The emulator is however, exof uncertainty including observation error, biological tremely fast to evaluate [10]. It provides insight into variability and the tolerance we place on the model’s the model’s structure and, thanks to its speed, it can accuracy, known as the model discrepancy. It is vital be used to help perform the global parameter search thatweperformaglobalparametersearchforallinput far more efficiently than approaches that just use the parameter settings that achieve an acceptable match. comparativelyslowscientificmodelitself(forexamples This is because a single solution for the rate parame- see [6, 8, 11–14]). ter values may suggest certain biological implications Manyanalysesandcorrespondingparametersearches andgiveparticularpredictionsforfutureexperiments, still fail because an appropriate measure of an acceptboth of which could be gravely misleading were we to able match