single Arabidopsis cell by iter- examplewillbeusedthroughoutthisMethodssection atively combining modelling with experimental anal- to demonstrate each of the three main parts of our ysis [30]. Kinetic modelling was used to analyse how approach: such a network regulates auxin concentration in the • Linking the model to reality Arabidopsis root, by controlling the relative contribu- • Bayesian Emulation tionofauxininflux,biosynthesisandefflux;andbyin- • History matching: a global parameter search tegratingauxin,ethyleneandcytokininsignalling[30]. Although some of the parameters in the model were Sayweareinterestedintheconcentrationofachembased on experimental data, most parameters were ical which evolves in time. We represent this concenchosen in an ad hoc way, by adjusting them to fit ex- tration as f t (x) where x is, for example, a reaction rateparameterandtistime.Wemodelf (x)withthe perimental data. Conditional on those somewhat ad t differential equation: hoc choices, it was shown that the hormonal crosstalk network quantitatively describes how the three hordf (x) mones (auxin, ethylene, and cytokinin) interact via t = xf (x) (1) dt t POLARISpeptide(PLS)[31,32]toregulateplantroot growth [30]. which in this case we can solve precisely to give In this work we demonstrate the power of the Bayesian emulation methodology by applying it to f (x) = f exp(xt) (2) t 0 the hormonal crosstalk network in Arabidopsis root development. Specifically, we explore the model’s 32- We will temporarily assume the initial conditions are dimensional parameter space, and identify the set of f = f (x) = 1. The system runs from t = 0 to 0 t=0 all acceptable matches between model outputs and t = 5 and we are at first interested in the value of experimental data, taking into account major sources f (x) at t = 3.5. This mathematical model features t of uncertainty. This provides much insight into the an input or rate parameter x, which we wish to learn model’s structure and the constraints imposed on the about. We do this using a measurement of the real birate parameters by the current set of observed data. ological system at t = 3.5 which we denote z, which We apply the methodology to a second, competing corresponds to, but is not the same as, the model outmodel, and hence are able to investigate gene func- putf (x).Notethatusually,formodelsofrealistic t=3.5 tions robustly. As an example, our analysis suggest complexity,wewouldnothavetheanalyticsolutionfor that, in the context of the hormonal crosstalk net- f (x)givenbyequation(2).Insteadwewouldresortto t work, POLARIS peptide (PLS) must have a role in a numerical integration method to solve equation (1) positively regulating auxin biosynthesis. thatmightrequiresignificanttimeforonemodelevalThe paper is organised as follows. In the Methods uation,ranging fromless thana second tohours, days section we begin by defining a simple 1-dimensional orevenweeks,dependingonthefullcomplexityofthe toy model that we use to illustrate our definitions and model [6, 12]. Such a computational cost, for a sinto demonstrate the three main parts of the Bayesian gle evaluation of the model, means that a full global Vernonetal. Page4of30 parameter search is computationally infeasible, espe- task is the process of comparing the model to expericially when the model has many rate parameters and mentaldata.Asacomparisonofthiskindinvolvessevtherefore a high dimensional input space, which may eral uncertainties that cannot be ignored, it is thererequire vast numbers of evaluations to explore fully. forevitaltodevelopaclearlydefinedstatisticalmodel We typically begin the analysis by exploring the for the link between systems biology model f(x) and model’sbehaviourforseveraldifferentvaluesoftheun- reality z. This allows for a meaningful definition of an knownrateorinputparameterx.Figure1(leftpanel), ‘acceptable’ match between a model run and the obshows five evaluations of the model f (x) for different served data. Here we describe a simple yet extremely t values of x between x = 0.1 and 0.5, coloured red to useful statistical model for the link between the biopurplerespectively,withtimeonthex-axis.Themea- logical model and reality, that has been successfully surementofthesystemisdenotedz,andisrepresented applied in a variety of scientific disciplines, for examastheblackpointinfigure1,with±3σ errorbarsrep- pleclimate,cosmology,oilreservoirmodellingandepie resenting observational error, defined precisely below. demiology [6, 8, 11, 12]. This measurement was made at t = 3.5 shown as the The most recognisable source of uncertainty is that verticaldashedline.Themostimportantquestionsfor of observational or experimental error. We represent the biologist at this point are: can the model match the uncertain quantities of interest in the real biologitheobserveddataz atall,andifso,whatistheentire calsystemasthevectory,whichwewillmeasurewith set of input parameter choices that give rise to ac- a vector of errors e to give the vector of observations ceptable matches between model output and observed z, such that data? Figure 1 (right panel) represents this question as it now shows only f (x) but now represented z = y + e (3) t=3.5 purely as a function of the input parameter x on the x-axis, with the red to purple points consistent with where we represent the errors as additive, although those in the left panel. The observed data z is now morecomplexformscouldbeused.Notethatz,y and represented as the solid black horizontal line, with the e here represent vectors of random quantities, which ±3σ error bars as the horizontal black dashed lines. will