the most important questions that a modeller may • Theremaybeseveraloutputsthataredifficultto have,identifyingifthemodelcanmatchthedata,and emulate in early waves (perhaps because of their where in input space such acceptable matches can be erratic behaviour in uninteresting parts of the infound. It requires only a limited specification related put space) but simple to emulate in later waves to the key uncertain quantities, in terms of means, oncewehaverestrictedtheinputspacetoamuch variances and covariances. A fully Bayesian approach smaller and more biologically realistic region. goes further [48], and delivers a posterior distribution across all uncertain quantities, which has the bene1-dimensional example fitofprovidingprobabilisticanswerstomostscientific Vernonetal. Page12of30 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 6 5 4 3 2 Rate Parameter Value x )x( 5.3=tf fo noitartnecnoC l l l l l 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 6 5 4 3 2 Rate Parameter Value x )x( 5.3=tf fo noitartnecnoC l l l l l l l Figure5 Leftpanel:theemulatorexpectationandcredibleintervalsasinfigure4,howevernowtheobservationzplusobservederror hasbeenincludedasthehorizontalblacksolidanddashedlinesrespectively.TheimplausibilitiesI(x)arerepresentedbythecolours onthex-axis:red,yellowandgreenforhigh(I(x)>3.5),borderline(3.5<I(x)<3)andlow(I(x)<3)implausibilityrespectively, withthegreenintervaldefiningthenon-implausibleregionX2 forthesecondwave.Rightpanel:thesecondwaveisperformedby evaluatingtworunslocatedwithinX2.TheemulatorbecomesmoreaccurateoverX2 andtheimplausibilitymorestrict,hence definingthesmallernon-implausibleregionX3,givenbythegreeninterval.Astheemulatorisnowfarmoreaccuratethatthe observederrorswithinX3,additionalrunswillnotsignificantlyreduceX3 anyfurther,andhencethehistorymatchiscomplete. questionse.g.inthiscontextitgivestheposteriordis- required, the most popular being MCMC [49]. While tribution of the location of the true input x∗. How- MCMC has enjoyed much success, issues still remain ever, it requires a more detailed prior specification of over the convergence of an MCMC algorithm for even joint probability distributions across all these quan- modest dimensional problems [50]. Often the likelitities, and critically, it also assumes the existence of hood may be highly multimodal, and therefore vast a single true x∗ (and the accuracy of the statistical numbers of model evaluations are usually required to model that defines it). This may not be judged appro- reach convergence, making MCMC prohibitively expriate, for example, in a situation where two different pensive for models of even moderate evaluation time. x∗s were found that gave good matches to two dif- In contrast, the calculations for history matching are ferent subsets of the observed data. In more detail, relatively fast and simple. a fully Bayesian specification in the context of equa- A third issue is that of robustness: small changes tions(3)and(4)requiresthemultivariatedistributions in the full Bayesian specification, especially involving π(z|y),π(y|f(x∗)),π(f(x(j))|x(j))foracollectionofin- the likelihood, can lead to substantial changes in the puts x(j), and a prior distribution π(x∗) over the true posterior.Thesesensitivitiescangounnoticedandcan inputx∗.Meaningfulspecificationsofthisformcanbe be hard to analyse [51–54], but will call into question difficult to make, for example, often familiar distribu- the resulting scientific conclusions. tionalformsareassumedsuchasthemultivariatenor- Due to these issues, we support the fully Bayesian mal distribution, but such choices are often made for approach,butonlyforcaseswheresuchdetailedcalcumathematicalconvenienceorcomputationaltractabil- lationsarewarranted,sayforawelltested,accuratebiity. Really, choices of this kind demand a careful jus- ologicalmodel,whichpossesseswellunderstoodmodel tification, without which results such as the posterior deficiencies, and which is to be combined with data for x∗ rapidly lose meaning. For example, the fully that have a trusted observation error structure, and Bayesian approach will, after substantial calculation, critically, where full probabilistic results are deemed return a posterior for x∗, which may be quite narrow, essential. If, instead, the main concern is to check even if the model cannot fit the observed data at all. whetherthemodelcanfitthedata;toseewhatregions History matching however may quickly discover this ofinputparameterspacegiveacceptablematches,and mismatch after a few waves, making further analysis forthistobeusedforfurthermodeldevelopment,then unnecessary. a history match may be the more appropriate analyTheseconddrawbackofthefullyBayesianapproach sis. Even if one wishes to forecast the results of fuis that it is often hard to perform the necessary cal- ture experiments [33, 55] and to make subsequent deculations,andthereforevariousnumericalschemesare cisions [42], history matching can be sufficient, as one Vernonetal. Page13of30 can either re-weight appropriately the samples gener- wave to generate samples from the current posterior atedinthefinalwave,aswasdonein[11],orasstated (which includes high emulator uncertainty), for use as in step 7 of the history matching algorithm, use more model runs in the next wave, may be highly ineffisophisticated sampling in the non-implausible region cient and could run into a series of difficulties. Such depending on the scientific question. strategieswouldnotfullyexploitthesmoothnessofthe Now the use of emulators can of course facilitate modeloutput,andmaytendtoclusterpointstogether the large number of model evaluations required for around the current posterior mode (hence squanderBayesian MCMC algorithms, admittedly at the ex- ing runs, for smooth deterministic models), leading to penseofincreaseduncertainty(seeforexample[9,56]). poor coverage of the full non-implausible space. Such However, a more serious problem is then encountered. strategiesmayalsobehighlymisledbyinaccurateemThe likelihood function, which is a core component of ulators and the subsequent posterior sensitivity comBayesian calculations, is constructed from all outputs bined with multimodal likelihood issues, leading to of interest (and therefore attempts to describe both clustereddesignsinthewrongpartsoftheinputspace, the‘good’and‘bad’inputssimultaneously).Hencewe and in some cases a lack of convergence. need to be able to emulate with sufficient accuracy all To conclude, if one really desires a fully Bayesian such outputs, including their possibly complex joint analysis, then performing a history match first can behaviour.Thismaybeextremelychallengingasoften, greatly improve efficiency. In this way we view history especiallyinearlywaves,theremayexistseveralerrat- matching not as a straight competitor to alternative ically behaved outputs that are extremely difficult to approaches, but instead a complimentary technique, emulate,whichwilldramaticallyfailemulatordiagnos- which has many benefits in its own