for we believe is highly likely to contain the true function the main Arabidopsis model example. f(x).Anotherdesirablefeatureoftheemulatoristhat these credible intervals decrease to zero width at the History matching: an efficient global parameter search five known run locations, as is appropriate for a deBayesian emulation is very useful in a variety of sitterministic function, as we precisely know the value of uations. As emulators are extremely fast to evaluate, f(x)there(andbecausewehavenoinactivevariables). theycanreplacetheoriginalmodelinanylargercalcuTherefore when x is close to a known run we are more lation,forexamplewhendesigningfutureexperiments certainaboutthepossiblevaluesoff(x),comparedto [42,43].Theycanalsoprovidemuchstructuralinsight when x is far from any such runs. into the behaviour of the model. One of the most imFigure 4 (right panel) shows an emulator as applied portant applications of emulation is to the problem of to a more complex 1-dimensional function. Here the performing a global parameter search. In this section Vernonetal. Page10of30 we describe a powerful iterative global search method We can combine the implausibility measures I (x) i known as history matching, which has been success- fromseveraloutputsinvarioussimpleways,forexamfully employed in a variety of scientific disciplines in- ple we could maximise over all outputs defining cluding galaxy formation [6, 7, 15, 22, 24], epidemiology [11, 25, 44, 45], oil reservoir modelling [8, 26–28], I (x) = maxI (x) (19) M i climate modelling [12], environmental science [16, 46] i∈Q and traffic modelling [29]. Many of these applications where Q represents the collection of all outputs, or involved models with substantial runtime, for which someimportantsubsetofthem(oftenwewillonlyemthe process of emulation is vital. ulate a small subset of outputs in early iterations). A When confronting a systems biology model with obmorerobustapproachwouldbetoconsiderthesecond serveddatathefollowingquestionsaretypicallyasked: or third maximum implausibility, hence allowing for 1 Are there any input parameter settings that lead some inaccuracy of the emulators [6]. Also, multivarito acceptable matches between the model output ate implausibility measures are available (see [6] for and observed data? details), but these require a more detailed prior speci2 If so, what is the full set X that contains all such fication,forexamplethisrequirescovariancesbetween input parameter settings? differentcomponentsofeand(cid:15).Notethatalowvalue oftheimplausibilityI (x)doesnotimplythattheinM History matching is designed to answer these quesput point x is ‘good’ or ‘plausible’ as it still may lead tions. It proceeds iteratively and employs implausibilto a poor fit to outputs that have not been included itymeasurestodeterminepartsoftheinputspacethat in Q yet. Also, low implausibility at x may occur becan be discarded from further investigation. cause of a high emulator variance Var (f (x)) which We can ask the question: for an unexplored input Di i onceresolvedfollowingfurtherrunsofthemodel,may parameter setting x, how far would the emulator’s exthen lead to a high implausibility at x. Hence we refer pected value for the individual function output f (x) i to low implausibility inputs x as “non-implausible”, befromthecorrespondingobservedvaluez beforewe i consistent with the literature [6–8, 11, 24, 25, 28]. could deem it highly unlikely for f (x) to give an aci We proceed iteratively, discarding regions of the inceptablematchwerewetoevaluatethefunctionatthis put parameter space in waves, refocussing our search value of x? The implausibility measure I (x) captures i on the remaining ‘non-implausible’ inputs at each this concept, and is given by: wave. Prior to performing the kth wave, we define the current set of non-implausible input points as X and (E (f (x))−z )2 k I2(x) = Di i i (18) the set of outputs that we considered for emulation in i Var Di (f i (x))+Var((cid:15) i )+Var(e i ) the previous wave as Q k−1 . We proceed according to the following algorithm. The numerator of equation (18) gives the distance betweentheemulatorexpectationE (f (x))andtheob- 1 Designandevaluateawellchosensetofrunsover Di i servation z , while the denominator standardises this thecurrentnon-implausiblespaceX .e.g.usinga i k quantity by all the relevant uncertainties regarding maximin Latin hypercube with rejection [6]. this distance: the emulator variance Var (f (x)), the 2 Checktoseeiftherearenew,informativeoutputs Di i model discrepancy variance Var((cid:15) ) and the observa- that can now be emulated accurately (that were i tion error variance Var(e ). This structure is a direct difficult to emulate well in previous waves) and i consequence of equations (3) and (4). A large value add them to the previous set Q , to define Q . k−1 k of I (x) for a particular x implies that we would be 3 Usetherunstoconstructnew,moreaccurateemi unlikely to obtain an acceptable match between f (x) ulators defined only over the region X for each i k and z were we to run the model there. Hence we output in Q . i k can discard the input x from the parameter search 4 The implausibility measures I (x), i ∈ Q , are i k if I (x) > c, for some cutoff c, and refer to such an then recalculated over X , using the new emulai k input as implausible. We may choose the cutoff c by tors. appealing to Pukelsheim’s 3-sigma rule [47], which is 5 Cutoffs