acceptable match between f (x) ulators defined only over the region X for each i k and z were we to run the model there. Hence we output in Q . i k can discard the input x from the parameter search 4 The implausibility measures I (x), i ∈ Q , are i k if I (x) > c, for some cutoff c, and refer to such an then recalculated over X , using the new emulai k input as implausible. We may choose the cutoff c by tors. appealing to Pukelsheim’s 3-sigma rule [47], which is 5 Cutoffs are imposed on the Implausibility meathepowerfulresultthatstatesthatforanycontinuous, sures I (x) < c and this defines a new, smaller i unimodal distribution, 95% of its probability must lie non-implausible volume X which should satk+1 within ±3σ, regardless of asymmetry, skew, or heavy isfy X ⊂X ⊂X . k+1 k tails, which suggests that a choice of c = 3 could be 6 Unlessa)theemulatorvariancesforalloutputsof deemed reasonable [6]. interest are now small in comparison to the other Vernonetal. Page11of30 sources of uncertainty due to the model discrep- We now demonstrate the history matching process ancy and observation errors, or b) the entire in- asappliedtothesimple1-dimensionalexponentialexputspacehasbeendeemedimplausible,returnto ample. Figure 5 (left panel) shows the emulator exstep 1. pectationandcredibleintervalsasinfigure4,however 7 If 6 a) is true, generate as large a number as nowtheobservationz plusobservederrorhasbeeninpossible of acceptable runs from the final non- cluded as the horizontal black solid and dashed lines implausiblevolumeX,sampleddependingonsci- respectively.Herewehavesetthemodeldiscrepancyto entific goal. zero (σ (cid:15) = 0) and reduced the size of the observation errors σ for clarity. Also given are the implausibilie Wethenanalysetheformofthenon-implausiblevol- ties I(x) as represented by the colours on the x=axis: umeX,thebehaviourofmodelevaluationsfromdiffer- red, yellow and green for high (I(x)>3.5), borderline entlocationswithinitandthecorrespondingbiological (3.5 < I(x) < 3) and low (I(x) < 3) implausibility implications.Iftheentireinputspacehasbeendeemed respectively. implausibleinstep6b),thismayimplythatthemodel The non-implausible space X at wave 1 is the full 1 isinconsistentwiththe observeddata, withrespectto initial range of the rate parameter x, which is 0.075< the specified uncertainties. This could be because the x < 5.25. If we impose cutoffs of I(x) < 3 then this biological principles that underlie the model’s struc- defines the wave 2 non-implausible space X as shown 2 ture are incorrect, and hence remodelling is required. bythegreenregionofthex-axisinfigure5(leftpanel). Or that we may have underestimated the observation Wethenperformthesecondwavebydesigningaset errors,themodeldiscrepancyoreventheemulatorun- of two more runs over X 2 , reconstructing the emulacertainty,althoughemulatordiagnostics[40]combined tor over this region, and recalculating the implausibilwith the choice of fairly conservative cutoffs should ity measure I(x). The results of this second wave are make the latter unlikely. Note that concluding that a shown in figure 5 (right panel). It can be seen that far larger model discrepancy is needed is essentially the emulator is now highly accurate over the X 2 restating that the model is highly inaccurate, and may, gion and that the non-implausible region in green has for example be judged unfit for purpose. beenfurtherreduced.Astheemulatorisnowfarmore accurate than the corresponding observation error, we The history matching approach is powerful for sevmay stop the analysis with this wave as X (cid:39) X, imeral reasons: 3 plying that further runs will do little to reduce the • As we progress through the waves and reduce the non-implausible region further. Note that providing volumeoftheregionofinputspaceofinterest,we we have enough runs in each wave, we would often expectthefunctionf(x)tobecomesmoother,and create new emulators at each wave, defined only over hencetobemoreaccuratelyapproximatedbythe the current green non-implausible region [6], instead regressionpartoftheemulatorβ g (x ),which of updating emulators from previous waves, as in figis often composed of low order p ij ol i y j no A m i ials (see ure 5. See the Supplementary Material for R code to reproducetheexamplemodeloutput,discrepancy,emequation 5). ulationandhistorymatchingplotsoffigures1,2,4and • At each new wave we have a higher density of 5 respectively. pointsinasmallervolumeandhencetheGaussian processtermu (x )intheemulatorwillbemore i Ai History Matching and Bayesian MCMC effective, as it depends mainly on the proximity Here we discuss the standard form of a full Bayesian of x to the nearest runs. analysis, and compare it to the above history match- • In later waves the previously strongly dominant ing approach, highlighting the relative strengths and active inputs from early waves will have their efweaknesses of each method. fectscurtailed,andhenceitwillbeeasiertoselect Historymatchingattemptstoanswerefficientlysome additional active inputs, unnoticed before. of the most important questions that a modeller may • Theremaybeseveraloutputsthataredifficultto have,identifyingifthemodelcanmatchthedata,and emulate in early waves (perhaps because of their where in input space such acceptable matches can be erratic behaviour in uninteresting parts of the infound. It requires only a limited specification related put space) but simple to emulate in later waves to the key uncertain quantities, in terms of means, oncewehaverestrictedtheinputspacetoamuch variances and covariances. A fully Bayesian approach smaller and more biologically realistic region. goes further [48], and delivers a posterior distribution across all uncertain quantities, which has the bene1-dimensional example fitofprovidingprobabilisticanswerstomostscientific Vernonetal. Page12of30 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5