also depended on the same input ity y, through the joint structure of (cid:15) (see for example x,wewouldbeextremelyunlikelytobeabletomatch [6, 16]). This is especially important in prediction: as both outputs to their measurements as we would have a simple example, if our model undershot every auxin to obtain exact matches simultaneously for precisely output we have measured so far, we may suspect that the same value of x. Inferences and predictions about it will undershoot future measurements of auxin also, the biological system made from this case, using this and may wish to build this into our prediction for fuvalue of x are not trustworthy. ture y [33]. Figure2(rightpanel)showsthefarmorerealisticsitWe can specify probabilistic attributes of (cid:15) a priori, uation where we include both observation error e (the or learn about them by comparing to observed data. For direct specification, there are often various simple black dashed lines represent z ±3σ e ) and model disexperimentsthatcanbeperformedonthemodelitself crepancy (cid:15) (the purple dashed lines show f(x)±3σ (cid:15) ). to obtain assessments of σ and other aspects if nec- Aswehavetakenintoaccountbothmajortypesofun- (cid:15) essary. For example, often models are run from exact certaintythereisnowarangeofacceptablevaluesforx initial conditions, so performing a set of exploratory (green points) with borderline/unacceptable points in model evaluations with the initial conditions appro- yellow/red.Ifweweretoconsideradditionaloutputsof priately perturbed would provide a lower bound on themodel,westillhaveachancetomatchthemsimulσ . See [16] where several such assessment methods taneously to data for a subset of the currently accept- (cid:15) are demonstrated, for more details. able points. If on the other hand we cannot find any Vernonetal. Page6of30 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 6 5 4 3 2 Rate Parameter Value x )x( 5.3=tf fo noitartnecnoC 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 6 5 4 3 2 Rate Parameter Value x )x( 5.3=tf fo noitartnecnoC Figure2 Leftpanel:theunrealisticcasewhenboththeobservationerroreandmodeldiscrepancy(cid:15)areignored.Themodelf(x)is givenbythepurpleline,theobserveddataz bythehorizontalblackline.Hereonlyonevalueofxcanbeviewedasacceptable (colouredgreen)whileallothersareunacceptable(red),howeverarepeatoftheexperimentwouldyieldaslightlydifferentz and hencex.Rightpanel:themorerealisticsituationwhereweincludebothobservationerrore(theblackdashedlinesrepresent z±3σe)andmodeldiscrepancy(cid:15)(thepurpledashedlinesshowf(x)±3σ(cid:15)).Thereisnowarangeofacceptablevaluesforx(green points)withborderline/unacceptablepointsinyellow/red.Itnowmaybepossibletosimultaneouslymatchmultipleoutputs. acceptablepointsxevengiventheuncertaintiesrepre- Mostmodelsarecomplexenoughthattheyrequirenusented by e and (cid:15), then we can state that the model is merical integration methods to solve, and hence take inconsistentwiththeobserveddataandthereforemost appreciabletimetoevaluate.Thisevaluationtimecan likelybasedonincorrectbiologicalprinciples.Further, range anywhere from less than a second to minutes, inclusion of the observation error and model discrep- hours or even days for highly sophisticated models: ancy terms often aids a global parameter search as our approach is applicable in any of these cases, and they tend to smooth the likelihood surface (or com- adds more value as the dimensionality and evaluation parable objective function), making it both easier to time of the model increases. explore while simultaneously more robust. They also ABayesianemulatorisafast,approximatemimicof help reduce the temptation to chase the often scien- thefullsystemsbiologymodel.Itgivesinsightintothe tifically misleading global minimum, such as the lone structureofthemodel’sbehaviourandcanbeusedingreen point in figure 2 (left panel), instead suggest- stead of the model in many complex calculations. The ing that the identification of a set of acceptable input emulator gives a prediction of what the model’s outpoints is the appropriate goal for such a search (see putf(x)willbeatayettobeevaluatedinputpointx, the green points in figure 2 (right panel)). andadditionallyprovidesanassociateduncertaintyfor that prediction (these are often expressed as posterior Bayesian emulation of systems biology models distributions, or simply expectations and variances in Many complex mathematical models have been devel- some cases). Critically an emulator is extremely fast opedandemployedwithintheareaofsystemsbiology. to evaluate as it only requires a few matrix multipliOftenthesemodelshavehighdimensionalinputspaces cations, and hence can be used to explore the input in that they posses several input parameters, for ex- space more fully, as for example in a global parameter amplereactionrateparameters,thatmustbespecified search. inordertoevaluatethemodel.Werepresentthelistof ApopularchoicefortheBayesianemulatorformodel such inputs as the vector x, with individual inputs as f(x),whichhasindividualoutputsf (x),i=1...q,is i x withk =1,...,d.Themodelmayhaveanynumber structured as follows: k of outputs, denoted as the vector f(x), with individ- (cid:88) ual outputs as f (x) with i = 1,...,q, the behaviour f (x)= β g (x )+u (x )+w (x) (5) i i ij ij Ai i Ai i of which we want to investigate, possibly comparing j some of these to observed data. For example, the indeximaylabelthedifferenttimesweareinterestedin, where the active variables x are a subset of the inAi orthedifferentchemicaloutputsofthemodel,orboth. puts x that are most influential for output f (x). The i Vernonetal. Page7of30 firsttermontherighthandsideoftheemulatorequa- We proceed by performing an initial set of carefully tion (5) is a regression term, where g are known de- chosenmodelevaluations,oftenpickedtobe‘spacefillij terministic functions of x , a common choice being ing’, i.e. well spread out over the input space. For exAi low order polynomials, and β are unknown scalar amplewemayuseamaximinLatinhypercubedesign, ij regression coefficients. The second term, u (x ) is a anapproximatelyorthogonaldesignwhichattemptsto i Ai Gaussian process over x (or in a less fully speci- ensure there are no large holes in-between the run loAi fiedversion,aweaklysecondorderstationarystochas- cations(seefigure3and[34–36]).AnnpointLatinhytic process), which means that if we choose a finite percubedesigniscreatedbydividingtherangeofeach set of inputs {x(1),...,x(s)}, the uncertain outputs inputintonsub-intervals,andplacingpointstoensure Ai Ai there is only ever one point in each sub-interval (this u (x(1)),...,u (x(s)) will have a multivariate normal i Ai i Ai can be done using the lhs() function in