decreases this regulatory 6a strength. Thus, low values of k indicate that a reg- k [ET] [PLSp] k [ET] 6a 2a −→ 2a (28) ulatory relationship of ethylene inhibiting PLSm pro- 1+ [CK] k 2c +[PLSp] 1+ [CK] duction is required. The optical depth and minimised k2b k2b implausibility plots corresponding to k 6a in Figure 9 Therefore the k 2c = 0 case implies that the PLS gene showthathighvaluesofk 6a areruledout.Ouranalysis hasnodirectfunctioninauxinbiosynthesis,wherethe suggests that no acceptable parameter combinations k > 0 case would imply that it does. However, for 2c with large k 6a can be found that are consistent with severaloftheoutputsconsidered,[PLSp]canalsotend thetargetdata,andhenceourresultsstronglysupport to zero, implying that the limit given in equation (28) the assertion that the inhibition of PLSm production is not uniquely defined, and that the original model is by ethylene is required for predicting known experi- not continuous at k =0. Hence, to answer questions 2c Vernonetal. Page25of30 regardingtheroleofthePLSgeneinauxinbiosynthe- runs found for the k > 0 model (red box plots) and 2c siswecannotsimplyexaminelowvaluesofk .Asthe thek =0model(blueboxplots)intermsofindivid2c 2c k = 0 case effectively defines a distinct model, we ual input rate parameters as labelled along the x-axis. 2c perform a new 5 wave history match to find any ac- Note that the two sets of acceptable runs being comceptable matches to the observed data, following the pared correspond to the red lines in figures 10 and 12 same methodology as described above. The results of respectively. The y-axis is on a log scale, and the 10 the new history match are given in figure 12, and no- grey rectangles show the initial ranges that define the tably we again found several acceptable wave 5 runs original search region X as given in table 2. The light 1 shown as the red lines, that are in agreement with the blue horizontal lines show the input parameter values observed trends. The acceptable runs were found in of the previous best run as found by [30]. The main a smaller region than previously, with a volume of X differences between the two models’ acceptable runs approximately 2.4×10−8 of that of X . are exhibited by the following parameters or ratios 1 Comparingtheresultsofthek =0case(figure12) of parameters: k /k , k , k /k , k /k , k /k , 2c 2 1a 2b 3 1a 3a 1a 12a 12 with the results of the k >0 case (figure 10) we can k /k , k , k /k . To the best of our knowledge, 2c 15 14 18 19 18 immediately see some important differences between the biological significance of many of these differences thetwomodels.FortheAuxin mufeoutput(7therror cannotbejudgedusingcurrentbiologicalinsight.Howbar from the left), the k > 0 model always returns ever, two ratios, k /k and k /k , do reveal some 2c 2 1a 3a 1a the correct negative trend. In contrast the k = 0 important results. k is the maximal rate of trans2c 1a model returned the incorrect positive trend for the porting auxin from shoot to root; k is the back2 vast majority of the wave 1, 2 and 3 runs, implying ground auxin biosynthesis rate; k is the rate con3a that there is only a very small region of input space stant describing the control of ethylene downstream that returns the correct negative trend, a region lo- over auxin transport from root to shoot. First, biologcated by the history match analysis and explored by ically k /k must be very small. This is because the 2 1a thewave5runs.Withoutsuchananalysisitwouldbe background auxin biosynthesis rate, k , must be very 2 easy to incorrectly conclude that the k = 0 model small and usually biologically negligible, as it repre2c is inconsistent with the data. This demonstrates per- sentsthenon-enzymaticprocessinauxinbiosynthesis. haps the most important difficulty in exploring Moreover, auxin transport from shoot to root, whose high dimensional models: there may be one (or more) maximal rate is k , is an important process, as evi1a extremely small regions of input space of scientific in- denced experimentally [65]. Therefore, k should be 1a terest, and conventional optimisation techniques may large. However, for the k =0 model to match target 2c easily get stuck in local minima far away from these data, the majority of acceptable runs have relatively regions.OurBayesianhistorymatchingapproachhow- largek /k ,whileforthek >0modelmuchsmaller 2 1a 2c ever is specifically designed to combat such difficulties and more realistic values are preferred. Second, bioby carefully exploring the space using efficient emula- logically k /k should be small. This is because it is 3a 1a tor based global search methods, as we have demon- knownthatauxinmorepredominantlytransportsfrom strated here. shoot to root, to form an auxin concentration maxiAfter considering that the PLS gene is required for mum in the root tip [66, 67]. However, for the k =0 2c the response of ethylene downstream based on exper- modeltomatchtargetdata,thesetofacceptableruns