35]), using for detailedspecificationofthemodeldiscrepancyVar((cid:15) ), example the lhs() function in R [37]. Each of these i which would most likely include correlations between runs specifies a distinct set of values of all the rate differentoutputsthatexploitedthejointstructuresug- parameters in x, and therefore for each run the difgestedbythechoiceofchemical,choiceofmutantand ferential equations given in table 1 were solved nuchoice of feeding regime, or even including a simple merically using the lsoda() function again in R, with dependence on certain input parameters. See [6], [16] initial conditions given in table 3, up to t = 10000 and [8] for examples of more detailed model discrep- seconds to ensure equilibrium is reached (equilibrium ancyspecificationsinalternativeapplications,and[18] wasthenchecked).Eachruntookapproximately1secand [15] for further discussions. ond of real time to evaluate, implying that although Figure 7 shows all 16 intervals corresponding to this is a relatively fast model, it is still too slow to exthe measured trends, as represented by equation (24), haustively search the full 23 dimensional input space, Vernonetal. Page18of30 ) ( x f = dnert goL i 01 5 0 5− tw_nixuA tw_KC um_nixuA af_nixuA ef_nixuA cf_nixuA efum_nixuA um_TE af_TE ef_TE cf_TE um_KC af_KC ef_KC cf_KC af_mSLP ef_mSLP cf_mSLP Wave 1 l Observed Data Prev. Run l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l Figure7 The2000wave1runoutputsfi(x)forall18outputsconsidered(seeequation(22))areshownasthepurplelines,with theobserveddatazi±3σi givenastheblackerrorbars,andthebestrunpreviouslyfoundby[30]shownasthelightblueline.The horizontalblacklineatzerorepresentsnotrend.AstheserunsweregeneratedfromaspacefillingmaximinLatinhypercubedesign, theycangivesubstantialinsightintothebroadbehaviourofthemodelovertheinitialsearchregionX1.Wecanseethatsome outputsareseeminglyconstrainedtogiveonlypositive(e.g.Auxin fa)ornegative(e.g.Auxin mu)trends,andthatmanyofthe runsarefarfromthetargetranges(asthey-axisisonalogscale).Wealsofindthatnoindividualwave1runpassesthroughevery oneofthetargetintervals. which would likely require a vast number of runs. The 2000runsallowsforatractableinverseVar(D )−1that i emulators that we develop turn out to be 4 orders of is computed in the emulator equations (8) and (9). magnitude faster than the model, and hence allow a Thewave1runoutputsf (x)forall18outputsconi much more detailed and efficient exploration. This ra- sidered(seeequation(22))areshowninfigure7asthe tio of emulator speed versus model speed actually im- purple lines, with the observed data intervals z ±3σ i i provesasthemodelcomplexityincreases,asthespeed given as the black error bars, and the best run previof an emulator is a function of the number of runs ouslyfoundbyanddiscussedin[30]shownasthelight used to construct it [6]. Note that when choosing the blue line. As these runs were generated from a space numberofwave1runs,thecomputermodelliterature fillingdesign,theycangivesubstantialinsightintothe tentatively suggests that at least 10d are required for broad behaviour of the model over the initial search emulatorconstruction,wheredisthedimensionofthe region X . We can see that some outputs are seem1 inputspace.Ofcourse,dependingonthecomplexityof ingly constrained to give only positive (e.g. Auxin fa) the model, far more may be needed. Here, as the Ara- or negative (e.g. Auxin mu) trends, and that many of bidopsis model is of reasonable speed, we could afford the runs are far from the target ranges (as the y-axis to run 2000 runs per wave, and this allows the fitting is on a log scale). We also find that no individual e ofhigherorderpolynomialtermssuchascubics,oncea wave 1 run passes through every one of the target inrestrictedsetofactiveinputshasbeenidentified.Also, tervals. This all suggests that the volume of the non- Vernonetal. Page19of30 implausible space X containing only acceptable runs where D is the corresponding vector of 2000 run i may be small or indeed zero, and hence we may need output values. Emulator diagnostics were then perseveral waves for the history match. formed by evaluating 200 new diagnostic runs and We employ the more general emulator structure as comparingthemtothecorrespondingemulatorpredicrepresented by equation (5). For each output f (x), tions, in the form of prediction intervals E (f (x))± i (cid:112) Di i we identify the list of active input parameters x by 3 Var (f (x)) (here 200 runs was deemed sufficient Ai Di i fitting first order polynomials in x and selecting the but see [40] for detailed emulator diagnostics). In the activeinputsbasedonAICcriteria(usingforexample firstwavewefoundthat13outofthe18outputswere the lm() and step() functions in R [37]). We choose straightforward to emulate, in that their emulators the set of deterministic functions g (x ) by select- were of sufficient accuracy to allow reasonably large ij Ai ing terms from the complete third order polynomials parts of the input space to be removed, while simultain the active inputs, discarding terms again based on neously satisfying emulator diagnostics. The remainAIC criteria (see [6, 7, 15, 22] for more details). We ing5outputswerelefttobeconsideredinlaterwaves. show the structure of these wave 1 emulators in terms Eachofthese13outputs(thatdefineQ )requiredbe1 of the deterministic functions g (x ), and the choice tween 7-13 active inputs x , out of a total of 31 full ij Ai Ai ofactivevariablesx ,intheSupplementaryMaterial. or 23 reduced input parameters x, which represents a Ai Due to the large number of runs and in the absence of substantial dimensional reduction and hence a large strong prior information, we set E(β )=0 andtake a benefit to the emulator construction process and subij large Var(β ) limit. The β terms will hence behave, sequent parameter search, as discussed in [15]. This is ij ij after the Bayes Linear update represented by equa- inadditiontothespeedincreaseofusingemulatorsas tions (8) and (9), approximately like their Ordinary they are in