model output and observed z, such that data? Figure 1 (right panel) represents this question as it now shows only f (x) but now represented z = y + e (3) t=3.5 purely as a function of the input parameter x on the x-axis, with the red to purple points consistent with where we represent the errors as additive, although those in the left panel. The observed data z is now morecomplexformscouldbeused.Notethatz,y and represented as the solid black horizontal line, with the e here represent vectors of random quantities, which ±3σ error bars as the horizontal black dashed lines. will reduce to scalar random quantities if there is only e We see that there will be acceptable values of x ap- one quantity of interest. A common specification [6] proximately between 0.3 and 0.35. that we will employ here is to judge the errors to be For a general complex model f (x), that possesses a independent from y, and unbiased with expectation t large number of input or rate parameters and possi- E(e)=0 and, for the scalar case, Var(e)=σ2. e bly several outputs, a full analysis of the model’s be- An important distinction to make is between the haviour encounters the following issues: modelofthebiologicalsystem,representedasthevectorf(x),andthesystemitselfy.Werepresentthedif1 Whencomparingthemodeltoobserveddatafrom ference between these using a model discrepancy term the real biological system, an adequate statistical asfollows.Evenwerewetoevaluatethemodelf(x)at description of the link between model and reality, its best possible choice of input x∗, the output f(x∗) covering all major uncertainties, is required. would still not be in agreement with the real biologi2 For complex models, the time taken to evaluate calsystemvaluey,duetothemanysimplificationsand the model numerically is so long that an exhausapproximations of the model. Hence we state that: tive exploration of the model’s behaviour is not feasible. y = f(x∗) + (cid:15) (4) 3 The appropriate scientific goal should be to identify all locations in input parameter space that wherethe(cid:15)isthemodeldiscrepancy:avectorofuncerlead to acceptable fits between model and data, tain quantities that represents directly the difference and not just find the location of a single good betweenthemodelandtherealsystem.Againwetreat match. y,f,x∗and(cid:15)asvectorsofrandomquantities.Asimple Methodstoaddressthesethreefundamentalissuesare andpopularspecification[6]wouldbetojudgethat(cid:15)is described in the next three sections. independent of f(x∗), x∗ and e, with E((cid:15))=0 and, in the scalar case, Var((cid:15))=σ2. In a multivariate setting, (cid:15) Model Discrepancy and Linking the model to reality wheref(x)describesavectorofoutputs(forexample, Mostsystemsbiologymodelsaredevelopedtohelpex- witheachoutputlabelledbytimet),thevector(cid:15)may plain and understand the behaviour of corresponding haveanintricatestructure,possessingnon-zerocovarireal world biological systems. An essential part of de- ancesbetweencomponentsof(cid:15).Thiscouldcapturethe termining whether such models are adequate for this related deficiencies of the model across differing time Vernonetal. Page5of30 0 1 2 3 4 5 8 6 4 2 Time t )x( tf fo noitartnecnoC x = 0.1 x = 0.2 x = 0.3 x = 0.4 x = 0.5 l l ll l l l 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 6 5 4 3 2 Rate Parameter Value x )x( 5.3=tf fo noitartnecnoC l l l l l Figure1 Leftpanel:fiveevaluationsofthemodelft(x)fordifferentvaluesofxbetweenx=0.1and0.5,colouredredtopurple respectively,withtimetonthex-axis.Themeasurementoftherealsystematt=3.5isdenotedz,andisrepresentedastheblack point,with±3σe errorbarsrepresentingobservationalerror.Rightpanel:themodelatt=3.5.Thecurveddashedlinegives ft=3.5(x)butnowitisrepresentedpurelyasafunctionoftheinputparameterxonthex-axis,withtheredtopurplepoints consistentwiththoseintheleftpanel.Theobserveddataz isgivenbythesolidblackhorizontalline,withthe±3σe errorbarsas thehorizontalblackdashedlines.Weseethattherewillbeacceptablevaluesofxapproximatelybetween0.3and0.35. points.Variousstructuresofincreasingcomplexityare 1-dimensional example available (for examples see [6, 8, 9]), along with meth- Figure 2 (left panel) shows the case for the simple ods for specification of their components [6, 16]. 1-dimensional exponential example model when both While the explicit inclusion of the model discrep- the observation error e and model discrepancy (cid:15) are ancy term (cid:15) is unfamiliar, it is now standard prac- ignored. The model f(x) is given by the purple line, tice in the statistical literature for complex models while the observed data z is given by the horizontal [7, 9, 17, 33]. Furthermore, any analysis performed black line. Here only one value of x can be viewed as without such a term is implicitly conditioned with the acceptable (coloured green) while all others are unacstatement “given the model is a perfect representaceptable(red).Thisparticularvalueofxisnotunique tion of reality for some value of the inputs x”, a statein that if we were to perform the measurement again, mentthatisrarelytrue.Themodeldiscrepancyallows due to measurement error we would get a different us to perform a richer analysis than before as we can value for z and hence for x. More importantly, if the now include any extra knowledge we have about the model had a second output, say corresponding to a model’s deficiencies to improve our modelling of realdifferent time, that also depended on the same input ity y, through the joint structure of (cid:15) (see for example x,wewouldbeextremelyunlikelytobeabletomatch [6, 16]). This is especially important in prediction: as both outputs to their measurements as we would have a simple example, if our model undershot every auxin to obtain exact matches simultaneously for precisely output we have measured so far, we may suspect that the same value of x. Inferences and predictions about it will undershoot future measurements of auxin also, the biological system made from this case, using this and may wish to build this into our prediction for fuvalue of