bined with multimodal likelihood issues, leading to of interest (and therefore attempts to describe both clustereddesignsinthewrongpartsoftheinputspace, the‘good’and‘bad’inputssimultaneously).Hencewe and in some cases a lack of convergence. need to be able to emulate with sufficient accuracy all To conclude, if one really desires a fully Bayesian such outputs, including their possibly complex joint analysis, then performing a history match first can behaviour.Thismaybeextremelychallengingasoften, greatly improve efficiency. In this way we view history especiallyinearlywaves,theremayexistseveralerrat- matching not as a straight competitor to alternative ically behaved outputs that are extremely difficult to approaches, but instead a complimentary technique, emulate,whichwilldramaticallyfailemulatordiagnos- which has many benefits in its own right. See [6] and tics [40]. Unfortunately, the likelihood and hence the the extended discussion in [15] for more details of this posterior may be highly sensitive to such poorly con- argument. structed emulators. Therefore, from a purely practical perspective, employing the full Bayesian paradigm us- History Matching and ABC ing inadequate emulators constructed at wave 1, may Another Bayesian technique that has been developed be unwise [6, 15]. morerecently,andcompared(somewhatcautiously)to history matching, by for example [57], is that of ApHistory Matching as a precursor to MCMC proximate Bayesian Computation or ABC [58]. While IfonedoeswishtoperformafullyBayesiananalysison thetwoapproachesseemtosharesomesuperficialsima well tested biological model, we would usually rec- ilarities, they are fundamentally different in their goal ommend performing a history match first [15]. This and the principled way each approach is set up and would identify the non-implausible region X which implemented.Forexample,ABCattemptstoapproxishouldcontainthevastmajorityoftheposterior.Then matefullBayesianinferenceandhencetoobtainanapMCMCoranequivalentBayesiancalculation(suchas proximate Bayesian posterior distribution (critically, importance sampling) can be performed within X, us- usingatolerancethattendstozero).Historymatching ing the accurate emulators defined in the final wave is not an inference procedure, as it is simply attempt- (for an example of this see [11]). ingtoruleoutalltheinputspacethatisclearlyinconThis is because if the model is of modest to high sistentwiththedatagiventhemodeldiscrepancyand dimension, the posterior may often only occupy a observation error (which are meaningful ‘tolerances’ tiny fraction of the original input space X . Unless thatcriticallywillnevertendtozero).Itisworthnot1 the model is very fast to evaluate, we would need to ing that if one attempts to specify a meaningful minuseemulatorstoovercometheMCMCconvergenceis- imum size for the tolerance in ABC, one is arguably sues, but performing enough model runs to construct notreallyemployingABCanymore,butisinsteadjust sufficiently accurate emulators over the whole of X back using Bayesian inference (as shown by [58]) in 1 wouldbeextremelyinefficient.Iterativehistorymatch- the form of a sampling-resampling algorithm (as deing naturally provides the accurate emulators that we scribed for example by [59]). History matching does wouldneed,definedonlyoverX,whichshouldcontain not attempt to probabilize the remaining input space the posterior. in any way, which can result in increased efficiency Note that the history match cuts out space effi- of the parameter search. We have directly compared ciently, based on small numbers of easy to emulate and contrasted the two approaches in [60], where we outputs in early waves, and designs appropriate runs demonstrated that a powerful version of ABC failed for the next wave that have good coverage proper- to find any part of parameter space that matched the ties for the current non-implausible region. Alterna- observeddatafora22-dimensionalstochasticepidemitive iterative strategies, such as using MCMC at each ologymodel,whilehistorymatchingfoundthecorrect Vernonetal. Page14of30 evaluated: these are represented in table 1 as the paAuxin signalling module rameters (k ,k ,...,k ). The rate parameter k 1 1a 1veth 6 v1 Auxin v3 is an exception: it is a control parameter and is set to v2 0.3 to represent the wildtype and 0 to represent the v4 pls mutant [30], and hence it will not be included in Ra Ra* our parameter search, leaving 31 free parameters. v5 As we will compare the model output to data at v6 PLSm v7 equilibriumonly[30],wecanperformasubstantialdiv18 v8 PLSpv9 mensional reduction of the input space. Referring to CK the model equations given in table 1, we see that at equilibriumthederivativeonthelefthandsideofeach v19 v10 Re Re* equation will equal zero, and that the right hand side v11 v14 v12 ET v13 CTR1 v15 CTR1* can hence be rearranged in terms of one less rate parameter. For example, the equation for d[Ra]/dt beX comes: v16 v17 (cid:18) (cid:19) k 0=−[Auxin][Ra]+ 5 [Ra∗] (20) Ethylene signalling module k 4 Figure 1 whichdependsonlyontheratioof(k 5 /k 4 ).Hencedata Figure6 Thenetworkforthehormonalcrosstalkin atequilibriumcaninformonlyabouttheratio(k /k ) 5 4 Arabidopsismodel,displayingthetwomainmodulesofauxin and cannot provide any constraint upon the original andethylenesignalling,asdescribedindetailin[30]. parameters k and k individually (it is worth noting 4 5 that if the model was a stochastic model instead of a deterministicmodel,itmaybepossibletolearnabout part of input space and many good matches using ap- the parameters individually, even at equilibrium, as proximately half the number of runs that the (failed) discussedinchapter1of[61]).Wecanthereforeremove ABC-SMC approach used. a total of 8 parameters and reduce the dimension of the input space from 31 to 23, by choosing to work Results with appropriate rate parameter ratios. The specific rate parameter ratios we use as well as the unaltered Application to the hormonal crosstalk network in rate parameters are given in table