The work by LeDoux (2003) mainly focussed on the role of the amygdala in fear conditioning. LeDoux identified that incoming sensory stimuli can directly move from thalamus to amygdala, thereby bypassing the previously assumed intermediate step through the neo-cortex.Assuch,theworkshowedthatemotionalresponsesmayalsobeelicited without neo-cortical reasoning. Damasio (1994) took a different perspective on rational emotions through the ‘somatic marker hypothesis’. He proposes that emotions are the result of bodily sensations,whichtelltheorganismthatcurrentsensations(i.e.events)arebeneficial(e.g.pleasure)orharmful(e.g.pain).Thesomaticmarkeristhereforeasignal EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 5 thatcanbeinterpretedasfeedbackaboutthedesirabilityofcurrentandimagined situations.ThesomaticmarkerhypothesishasbeeninterpretedintermsofRLas well (Dunn et al, 2006). Later work by Rolls shifted the attention from the amygdala to the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) (Rolls and Grabenhorst, 2008) Imaging studies have implicated the OFC in both reinforcement and affect, with direct input connections of most sensory channels (taste, olfactory, visual, touch), while projecting to several brain areas involving motor behaviour (striatum) and autonomic responses (hypothalamus) (Rolls and Grabenhorst, 2008). Also, single neuron studies have shown that visual and taste signals (the latter being a well-known primary reinforcer)convergeonthesameneurons(RollsandBaylis,1994),coined’conditional reward neurons’. Earlier work already identified ’error neurons’, which mainly respond when an expected reward is not received (Thorpe et al, 1983). Together,thesetheoriessuggestthatemotionsarecloselylinkedtorewardprocessing. These ideas are implicitly reflected in part of the reinforcement learningbasedimplementationsinthissurvey.TheseideasarealsoreflectedinRolls’evolutionarytheoryofemotion(RollsandGrabenhorst,2008),whichidentifiesemotions astheresultsofprimaryreinforcers(liketaste,affiliativetouch,pain)whichspecify generic goals for survival and reproductive success (like food, company and body integrity). According to Rolls, emotions exclusively emerge from these goalrelatedevents.Thisviewisalsocompatiblewiththecognitiveappraisalviewthat emotionsaretheresultofstimulibeingevaluatedaccordingtotheirgoal/needrelevance. However, in cognitive appraisal theory the ’goal’ is defined at a different level of abstraction. 2.3 Computer Science Affective modelling is a vibrant field in computer science with active subfields (Calvoetal,2014),includingworkonaffectdetectionandsocialsignalprocessing (Vinciarelli et al, 2012; Calvo and D’Mello, 2010), computational modelling of affectinrobotsandvirtualagents(Marsellaetal,2010),andexpressionofemotion in robots and virtual agents (Ochs et al, 2015; Paiva et al, 2015; Lhommet and Marsella, 2015). Since this survey focusses on affective modelling, in particular in RL-based agents, we provide some context by discussing emotions in different agent architectures, in particular symbolic and (non-RL) machine learning-based. One of the earliest symbolic/cognitive architectures was Velasquez’ Cathexis model (Velasquez, 1998). It incorporated Ekman’s six emotions in the pet robot Yuppy, which later also formed the basis for the well-known social robot Kismet (Breazeal,2003).Severalwell-knownsymbolicarchitectureshavealsoincorporated emotions, either based on categorical emotions (Murphy et al, 2002), somatic marker hypothesis (Laird, 2008), or appraisal theories (EMIB (Michaud, 2002), EMA (Marsella and Gratch, 2009) and LIDA (Franklin et al, 2014)). Although symbolic/cognitive architecture approaches are capable of solving a variety of AI tasks, they are limited with respect to learning from exploration and feedback in unstructured tasks. In contrast, machine learning implementations focus on learning, as the agent shouldgraduallyadapttoitsenvironmentandtask.Thedominantresearchdirectioninthisfieldisreinforcementlearning(RL)(SuttonandBarto,1998),whichwe 6 Moerlandetal. formally introduce in the next section. There are however other machine learning implementations that incorporate emotions. Some examples include agents based onevolutionaryneuralnetworks(ParisiandPetrosino,2010),thefree-energyprinciple (Joffily and Coricelli, 2013), Bayesian models (Antos and Pfeffer, 2011) or entropy (Belavkin, 2004). Finally, we want to stress that the focus of this review is on agent emotion, i.e. how it is elicited and may influence the agent’s learning loop. A related but clearly distinct topic is how human emotion may act as a teaching signal for this loop.Broekens(2007)showedhumanemotionalfeedbackspeedsupagentlearning inagrid-worldtaskcomparedtoabaselineagent.Thereareafewotherexamples in this direction (Hasson et al, 2011; Moussa and Magnenat-Thalmann, 2013), but in general the literature of emotion as a teaching signal is limited. Although the way in which humans actually tend to provide feedback is an active research topic (Thomaz and Breazeal, 2008; Knox et al, 2012, 2013), it remains a question whetheremotionswouldbeaviablechannelforhumanfeedback.Wedonotfurther pursue this discussion here, and put our focus on agent emotions in RL agents. 2.4 Computational Reinforcement Learning Computational reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto, 1998; Wiering and Van Otterlo, 2012) is a successful approach that enables autonomous agents to learn from interaction with their environment. We adopt a Markov Decision Process (MDP) specified by the tuple: {S,A,T,r,γ}, where S denotes a set of states, A a set of actions, T : S ×A → P(S) denotes the transition function, r :S×A×S →R denotes the reward function and γ ∈(0,1] denotes a discount parameter. The goal of the agent is to find a policy π :S →P(A) that maximizes the expected (infinite-horizon) discounted return: Qπ(s,a)=E (cid:110)(cid:88) ∞ γtr(s ,a ,s )|s =s,a =a (cid:111) π,T t t t+1 0 0 t=0 = (cid:88) T(s(cid:48)|s,a) (cid:104) r(s,a,s(cid:48))+γ (cid:88) π(s(cid:48),a(cid:48))Qπ(s(cid:48),a(cid:48)) (cid:105) (1) s(cid:48)∈S a(cid:48)∈A whereweexplicitlywriteouttheexpectationoverthe(possibly)stochasticpolicy and transition function. The optimal value function is defined as Q(cid:63)(s,a)=maxQπ(s,a) (2) π from which we can derive the optimal policy π(cid:63)(s)=argmaxQ(cid:63)(s,a) (3) a∈A There are several approaches to learning the optimal policy. When the environmental dynamics T(s(cid:48)|s,a) and reward function r(s,a,s(cid:48)) are known, we can use planning algorithms like Dynamic Programming (DP). However, in many applications the environment’s dynamics are hard to determine. As an alternative, EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 7 we can use sampling-based methods to learn the policy, known as reinforcement learning. ThereisalargevarietyofRLapproaches.First,wecanseparatevalue-function methods, which try to iteratively approximate the cumulative return specified in equation(1),andpolicysearch,whichtriestodirectlyoptimizesomeparametrized policy. Policy search shows promising results in real robotic applications (Kober and Peters, 2012). However, most