publication, Sequeira et al (2014) also extends this work to actually learn the required appraisal dimensions through genetic programming. Similar ideas can be found in Marinier and Laird (2008). One of the problems with both implementations is the distance-to-goal heuristicusedbybothemotion-basedagents,whichhasaccesstoadditionalinformationcomparedtothebaselineagent(althoughtheheuristicdoesnotmonotonically increase with the actual distance to goal). We discuss the empirical results of these papers more systematically in Section 7. 6.2 State modification Emotionshavealsobeenusedaspartofthestate-space(learningemotionspecific value functions and policies). An example is the social robot Maggie (CastroGonza´lez et al, 2013). When fear is elicited it becomes part of the state-space (replacing the dominant drive in a homeostatic system), which makes Maggie learn fear-specific action values. SomepapersexplicitlywriteQ(s,a,e),whereedenotestheemotionalstate,to illustrate this dependency (Ahn and Picard, 2006) (Ayesh, 2004). More examples of such implementations can be found in (Zhang and Liu, 2009) (Ficocelli et al, 2015)(Obayashietal,2012)and(Matsudaetal,2011).HoeydevelopedaPOMDP variantcalledBayesianAffectControlTheorythatincludesthethree-dimensional emotional space (valence, control, arousal) of a companion (Hoey et al, 2013) and the agent itself (Hoey and Schr¨oder, 2015). There are also implementations that use reinforcement learning to model the affective state of a human or group (Kim and Cho, 2015), but note that this is a different setting (i.e. RL to steer human emotional state instead of agent emotional state). Usingemotiontomodifythestatecanalsobeseenasaformofrepresentation learning.Therearenotmanyarchitecturesthatlearnthemodification(mosthardcode the emotion elicitation), with the exception of Williams et al (2015). Their architecture has similarities to the bottle-neck structure frequently encountered indeepneuralnetworkresearch,forexamplein(deep)auto-encoders(Goodfellow et al, 2016). We return to the fully-learned approach in the Discussion (Section 8). 6.3 Meta-learning Theprevioustwosectionsshowedhowemotionhasbeenimplicatedwithdetermining both the reward and state, which together can be considered as the (Internal) EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 23 Critic. Afterwards, the state and reward are used to learn a value function, a process that is usually referred to as the Adaptive Critic (see Figure 1). The learning process requires appropriate (and tedious) scaling of learning parameters, most noteworthy the learning rate α (see Section 2.4). The connection between emotion and these learning parameters was inspired by the work of Doya (2000, 2002). He identified neuroscientific grounding for the connection between several neurotransmitters and several reinforcement learning parameters. In particular, he proposed connections between dopamine and the temporaldifferenceerror(δ),serotoninandthediscountfactor(γ),noradrenaline and the Boltzmann action selection temperature (β) and acetylcholine and the learning rate (α). This work inspired both Shi et al (2012) and Von Haugwitz et al (2012) to implementemotionalsystemsinfluencingthesemetaparameters.Shiidentifiesthe connections joy → δ, anger → β, fear → α and relief → γ, while von Haugwitz changes only the latter two to surpise →(1−α) and fear →(1−γ). Recently, Williams et al (2015) also investigated metaparameter steering in navigation tasks. Together with (Sequeira et al, 2014) they are the only ones to learn the emotional connections, and then post-characterize the emerged phenomena. Williams trains a classifier connecting a set of primary reinforcers (both appraisal and homeostasis-based) to the metaparameters of their navigation algorithm.Theytraintwoemotionalnodes,andonlyafterwardsanthropomorphicized these. One node learned positive connections to progress and control and negatively to pain and uncertainty, while it caused the robot to increase its speed and reduce the local cost bias. In contrary, their second node was elicited by pain and novelty,whileitcausedtheoppositeeffectofnode1.Theyafterwardscharacterized these nodes as ‘happy’ and ‘fear’, respectively. 6.4 Action selection The final step of the RL loop involves action selection. This incorporates another crucial RL challenge, being the exploration/exploitation trade-off. Emotions have long been implicated with action readiness, and we actually already encountered two papers steering the Boltzmann action selection temperature β above (as it is technically also a metaparameter of the RL system). We next focus on those papers that specifically target action selection. One branch of research focusses on directly modifying the exploration parameter.Broekensetal(2007b,a)hasdoneextensiveinvestigationsoftheconnections betweenvalenceandtheexploration/exploitationtrade-off.Inoneimplementation (Broekensetal,2007a)selectionwasbasedoninternalsimulation,whereavalency determined the threshold for the simulation depth. In another paper (Broekens et al, 2007b) this valency directly influenced the β parameter in a Boltzmann action selection mechanism. Schweighofer and Doya (2003) applied small perturbations to the exploration parameters based on emotion, and subsequently kept the parameters if they performed better. Finally, Hogewoning et al (2007) investigated a hybrid system of Broekens and Schweighofer, trying to combine their strengths. Other papers use emotion to switch between multiple sets of value functions, thereby effectively determining which set should currently be used for action se- 24 Moerlandetal. lection. For example, both Tsankova (2002) and Hasson et al (2011) use a high frustration to switch between behaviour. Similarly, Kubota and Wakisaka (2010) use several emotions to switch between the weighting of different value functions. For example, happiness leads to exploration by selecting a value function derived from inverse recency. Note that such a recency feature was used in the appraisal section described previously, but there it modified the reward function, while now emotionisusedtoswitchbetweenvaluefunctions.Althoughthistechnicallyleads to similar behaviour, emotion intervenes at a different level. 6.5 Epiphenomenon Thefinal categoryof functions ofemotions seemsanemptyone: Epiphenomenon. Several papers have studied emotion elicitation in RL, without the emotion influencing the learning or behavioural loop. These papers usually focus on different evaluationcriteriaaswell(seeSection7).Examplesofpapersthatonlyelicitemotionsare(Coutinhoetal,2005),(Goerke,2006),(Sietal,2010),(KimandKwon, 2010),(Bozinovski,1982;Bozinovskietal,1996),(Jacobsetal,2014),(Lahnstein, 2005) and (Moerland et al, 2016). There