a learning architecture. Our main aim is to establish such a framework, EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 3 hoping to bridge the communities and potentially align research agendas. As a second motivation, this survey is also useful to engineers working on social agents and robots. Emotion has an important functional role in social interaction and social robotics (Fong et al, 2003). Our survey is also a practical guideline for engineerswhowishtoimplementemotionalfunctionalityintheirRL-basedagents and robots. Asafinalnote,theterm‘reinforcementlearning’maybemisleadingtoreaders from a cognitive AI or psychological background. RL may reminisce of ‘instrumental conditioning’, with stimulus-response experiments on short time-scales. Althoughindeedrelated,RLherereferstothecomputationaltermforasuccessful class of algorithms solving Markov Decision Processes by sampling and learning from data. MDPs (introduced in Section 2.4) provide a generic specification for short-term and long-term sequential decision-making problems with minimal assumptions.NotethatmanycognitiveAIapproaches,thatusuallyemployanotion of ‘goal’, are also expressible in MDP formulation by defining a sparse reward function with positive reward at the goal state. Thestructureofthisreviewisasfollows.First,Section2providesthenecessary backgroundonemotionandreinforcementlearningfrompsychology,neuroscience andcomputerscience.Section3discussesthesurvey’smethodologyandproposed taxonomy. Subsequently, Sections 4-6 contain the main results of this survey by systematically categorizing approaches to emotion elicitation, emotion types and emotion functionality. Additionally, the comparison of evaluation criteria is presented in (Section 7). The survey ends with a general discussion of our findings, highlights some important problems and indicates future directions in this field (Section 8). 2 Background As many papers included in this survey build upon psychological (2.1) and neuroscientific (2.2) theories of emotion, this section provides a high-level overview of these fields. Subsequently, we position our work in the computer science and machine learning community (2.3). We conclude these preliminaries by formally introducing computational reinforcement learning (2.4). 2.1 Psychology We discuss three dominant psychological emotion theories: categorical, dimensional, and componential theories (see also Lisetti and Hudlicka (2014)). Categoricalemotiontheoryassumesthereisasetofdiscreteemotionsforming the ‘basic’ emotions. These ideas are frequently inspired by the work by Ekman et al (1987), who identified the cross-cultural recognition of anger, fear, joy, sadness, surprise and disgust on facial expressions. In an evolutionary perspective, each basic emotion can be considered as an elementary response pattern, or action tendency (Frijda et al, 1989). For example, fear has the associated action tendencyofavoidance,whichhelpstheorganismtosurviveadangeroussituation, accompaniedbyanegativefeelingandprototypicalfacialexpression.However,the conceptof‘basic’emotionsremainscontroversialwithinpsychology,asisreflected 4 Moerlandetal. in the ongoing debate about which emotions should be included. The number of emotions to be included ranges from 2 to 18, see Calvo et al (2014). Dimensional emotion theory (Russell, 1978) assumes an underlying affective space. This space involves at least two dimensions; usually valence (i.e. positive/negative evaluation) and arousal (i.e. activation level) (Russell and Barrett, 1999). For example, fear is a highly arousing and negative affective state. The theory was originally developed as a ‘Core affect’ model, i.e. describing a more long-term, underlying emotional state. Osgood et al (1964) orginally added dominance as a third dimension, resulting in the PAD (pleasure, arousal, dominance) model. Dimensional models have difficulty separating emotion categories such as anger and disgust, which is a common critique on the theory. Finally, componential emotion theory, best known as cognitive appraisal theory(Lazarus,1991),considersemotionsastheresultsofevaluations(appraisals)of incomingstimuliaccordingtopersonalrelevance.Someexamplesoffrequentlyoccurring appraisal dimensions are valence, novelty, goal relevance, goal congruence and coping potential. Distinct emotions relate to specific patterns of appraisal activation. For example, anger is a result of evaluating a situation as harmful to one’s own goals with the emotion attributed to the responsible actor and at least some feeling of power. Some well-known appraisal theories that have been a basis for computational models are the OCC model (named after the authors Ortony, Clore and Collins) (Ortony et al, 1990), the component process theory of emotions (CPT) (Scherer et al, 2001), and the belief-desire theory of emotions (BDTE) (Reisenzein, 2009). Although cognitive appraisal theories describe the structure of emotion well, they are limited with respect to explaining where appraisals themselves come from, what the function of emotion is in cognition and intelligence, and how they are related to evolution. Note that the presented theories focus on different aspects of emotions. For example, appraisal theory focuses on how emotions are elicited, while categorical emotion models focus on action tendencies, i.e. the immediate function of emotions. Some consider emotions to precede action selection, while others focus on emotionsasfeedbacksignals(Baumeisteretal,2007).Inthissurveyemotionsare considered in a reward-based feedback loop, which involves both emotion elicitation and function. 2.2 Neuroscience Affectiveresponsesandtheirrelationtobehaviourandlearninghavealsobeenextensively studied in neuroscience; for a survey see (Rolls and Grabenhorst, 2008). We discuss theories by LeDoux, Damasio and Rolls. The work by LeDoux (2003) mainly focussed on the role of the amygdala in fear conditioning. LeDoux identified that incoming sensory stimuli can directly move from thalamus to amygdala, thereby bypassing the previously assumed intermediate step through the neo-cortex.Assuch,theworkshowedthatemotionalresponsesmayalsobeelicited without neo-cortical reasoning. Damasio (1994) took a different perspective on rational emotions through the ‘somatic marker hypothesis’. He proposes that emotions are the result of bodily sensations,whichtelltheorganismthatcurrentsensations(i.e.events)arebeneficial(e.g.pleasure)orharmful(e.g.pain).Thesomaticmarkeristhereforeasignal EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 5 thatcanbeinterpretedasfeedbackaboutthedesirabilityofcurrentandimagined situations.ThesomaticmarkerhypothesishasbeeninterpretedintermsofRLas well (Dunn et al, 2006). Later work by Rolls shifted the attention from the amygdala to the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) (Rolls and Grabenhorst, 2008) Imaging studies have implicated the OFC