(2) π from which we can derive the optimal policy π(cid:63)(s)=argmaxQ(cid:63)(s,a) (3) a∈A There are several approaches to learning the optimal policy. When the environmental dynamics T(s(cid:48)|s,a) and reward function r(s,a,s(cid:48)) are known, we can use planning algorithms like Dynamic Programming (DP). However, in many applications the environment’s dynamics are hard to determine. As an alternative, EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 7 we can use sampling-based methods to learn the policy, known as reinforcement learning. ThereisalargevarietyofRLapproaches.First,wecanseparatevalue-function methods, which try to iteratively approximate the cumulative return specified in equation(1),andpolicysearch,whichtriestodirectlyoptimizesomeparametrized policy. Policy search shows promising results in real robotic applications (Kober and Peters, 2012). However, most work in RL utilizes value-function methods, on which we also focus in this survey. Among value-function methods we should identify model-free versus modelbasedapproaches.Inmodel-freeRLweiterativelyapproximatethevalue-function through temporal difference (TD) learning, thereby avoiding having to learn the transition function (which is usually challenging). Well-known algorithms are Qlearning (Watkins, 1989), SARSA (Rummery and Niranjan, 1994) and TD(λ) (Sutton, 1988). The update equation for Q-learning is given by: (cid:104) (cid:105) Q(s,a)=Q(s,a)+α r(s,a,s(cid:48))+γmaxQ(s(cid:48),a(cid:48))−Q(s,a) (4) a(cid:48) where α specifies a learning rate. With additional criteria for the learning and exploration parameters we can show this estimation procedure converges to the optimal value function (Sutton and Barto, 1998). Model-based RL (Hester and Stone, 2012b) is a hybrid form of planning (like DP) and sampling (like TD learning). In model-based RL, we approximate the transitionandrewardfunctionfromthesampledexperience.Afteracquiringknowledgeoftheenvironment,wecanmixrealsampleexperiencewithplanningupdates. WewillwriteM ={Tˆ,rˆ}todenotetheestimatedmodel.Notethatamodelisderived from the full agent-environment interaction history at time-point t, as given by g ={s ,a ,s ,a ,s ,...s ,a ,s }. t 0 0 1 1 2 t−1 t−1 t A final aspect we have not yet discussed is the nature of the reward function.TraditionalRLspecificationsassumeanexternalrewardsignal(knownasan ‘external Critic’). However, as argued by Chentanez et al (2004), in animals the reward signal is by definition derived from neuronal activations, and the Critic therefore resides inside the organism. It therefore also incorporates information from the internal environment, making all reward ‘internal’. Singh et al (2010) identifiestwotypesofinternalreward:extrinsicinternalandintrinsicinternal(we will omit ‘internal’ and simply use extrinsic and intrinsic from now on). Extrinsic reward is related to resources/stimuli/goals in the external world (e.g. food), possibly influenced by internal variables (e.g. sugar level). In RL terms, extrinsic reward explicitly depends on the content of the sensory information (i.e. the observed state). On the contrary, intrinsic reward is not dependent on external resources, but rather derived from the agent-environment history g and current model M. An example of intrinsic reward in animals is curiosity. Intrinsic reward is domain-independent, i.e. curiosity is not related to any external resource, but canhappenatanystate(dependentontheagenthistoryg).Incontrast,extrinsic reward for food will never occur in domains where food does not occur. Intrinsic motivation has been identified to serve a developmental role to organisms. 8 Moerlandetal. 3 Survey structure and methodology We intended to include all research papers in which reinforcement learning and emotion play a role. We conducted a systematic Google Scholar search for ’Emotion’ AND ’Reinforcement Learning’ AND ’Computational’, and for ’Emotion’ AND’MarkovDecisionProcess’.Wescannedallabstractsforthejointoccurrence ofemotionandlearningintheproposedwork.Whenindoubt,weassessedthefull article to determine inclusion. Moreover, we investigated all papers citing several core papers in the field, for example, Gadanho and Hallam (2001), Salichs and Malfaz (2012), Broekens et al (2007a) and Marinier and Laird (2008). This resulted in 52 papers included in this survey. A systematic overview of these papers can be found in Table 9 and 10. The proposed taxonomy of emotion elicitation, type and function is shown in Table 1, also stating the associated subsection where each category is discussed. The elicitation and function categories are also visually illustrated in Figure 1, a figure that is based on the motivated RL illustration (with internal Critic) introduced in Chentanez et al (2004). Figure 1 may be useful to refer back to during readingtointegratethedifferentideas.Finally,foreachindividualpaperthereader canverifytheassociatedcategoryofemotionelicitation,typeandfunctionthrough the colour coding in the overview Table 9. There is one important assumption throughout this work, which we want to emphasize here. We already introduced the distinction between extrinsic and intrinsic motivation in RL at the end of the last section. Throughout this work, we parallel extrinsic motivation with homeostasis (Section 4.1), and intrinsic motivation with appraisal (Section 4.2). The extrinsic/intrinsic distinction is clearly partoftheRLliterature,whilehomeostasisandespeciallyappraisalbelongtothe affectivemodellingliterature.Wegroupthesetogether,astheconceptofextrinsic motivation is frequently studied in combination with homeostasis, while intrinsic motivation shows large overlap with appraisal theory. We will identify this overlap in the particular sections. However, the point we want to stress is that the concepts are not synonyms. For example, it is not clear whether some intrinsic motivation or appraisal dimensions also show homeostatic dynamics (a point at which we tend to disagree with Singh et al (2010)). However, a full discussion of the overlap and difference moves towards psychology, and is beyond the scope of our computational overview. We merely identify the overlap we observed in computationalimplementations,andthereforediscussbothextrinsic/homeostasisand intrinsic/appraisal as single sections. Table 1 Overview of categories in emotion elicitation, emotion type and emotion function. Thenumberbeforeeachcategoryidentifiestheparagraphwherethetopicisdiscussed.Emotion elicitationandfunctionarealsovisuallyillustratedinFigure1. Emotion elicitation Emotion type