the particular sections. However, the point we want to stress is that the concepts are not synonyms. For example, it is not clear whether some intrinsic motivation or appraisal dimensions also show homeostatic dynamics (a point at which we tend to disagree with Singh et al (2010)). However, a full discussion of the overlap and difference moves towards psychology, and is beyond the scope of our computational overview. We merely identify the overlap we observed in computationalimplementations,andthereforediscussbothextrinsic/homeostasisand intrinsic/appraisal as single sections. Table 1 Overview of categories in emotion elicitation, emotion type and emotion function. Thenumberbeforeeachcategoryidentifiestheparagraphwherethetopicisdiscussed.Emotion elicitationandfunctionarealsovisuallyillustratedinFigure1. Emotion elicitation Emotion type Emotion function 4.1Homeostasisand 5.1Categorical 6.1Rewardmodification extrinsicmotivation 5.2Dimensional 6.2Statemodification 4.2 Appraisal and intrinsic 6.3Meta-learning motivation 6.4Actionselection 4.3Value/reward-based 6.5Epiphenomenon 4.4Hard-wired EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 9 Fig.1 SchematicrepresentationofmotivatedreinforcementlearningbasedonChentanezetal (2004).AlthoughtraditionalRLassumesanexternalCritic(toprovidetherewardsignal),this actuallyhappensinsidethebrainofreal-worldorganisms.TherebytheCriticalsoincorporates, apartfromexternalsensations,internalmotivationstodeterminethecurrentrewardandstate. Motivationshavebeenderivedfromhomeostaticvariablesand/orinternalmodels.TheCritic then feeds the state and reward to the Agent. The Agent usually learns a value function (Adaptive Critic) and determines the next action (Actor). Note that ordinary RL, in which the reward is a fully external stimulus, is still a specific case of this scheme (with the Critic asidentityfunction).Emotionelicitation(green)hasbeenassociatedtoA)Homeostasisand extrinsicmotivation(paragraph4.1),B)Appraisalandintrinsicmotivation(4.2),C)Reward andvaluefunction(4.3)andD)Hard-wiredconnectionsfromsensations(4.4).Subsequently, the elicited emotion may also influence the learning loop. Emotion function (blue) has been linked to I) Reward modification (6.1), II) State modification (6.2), III) Meta-learning (6.3), IV)Actionselection(6.4)andfinallyasV)Epiphenomenon(6.5). 4 Emotion elicitation We identify four major categories of emotion elicitation: extrinsic/homeostatic (4.1), intrinsic/appraisal (4.2), value function and reward-based (4.3), and finally hard-wired (4.4). 10 Moerlandetal. 4.1 Homeostasis and extrinsic motivation Severalcomputationalimplementationsofemotionsinvolvehomeostaticvariables, drives and motivations. The notion of internal drives originates from the Drive Reduction Theory developed by Hull (1943), which identifies drive reduction as a centralcauseoflearning.Theseinnatedrivesarealsoknownasprimaryreinforcers, astheirrewardingnatureishard-wiredinoursystem(duetoevolutionarybenefit). An example ofa homeostatic variable isenergy/sugar level,which hasa temporal dynamic, an associated drive when in deficit (hunger) and can be satiated by an external influence (food intake). The reader might now question why machines even need something like ‘hunger’. However, for a robot the current energy level showssimilaritytohumansugarlevels(andbodyintegrityandpainshowsimilarity to a robot’s mechanical integrity, etc.). Thereby, homeostasis is a useful concept to study in machines as well (see also the remark about bio-inspiration in the Introduction). There is a vast literature on motivated reinforcement learning, see e.g. Konidaris and Barto (2006) and Cos et al (2013), mainly for its potential to naturally switch between goals. Early implementations of these ideas outside the reinforcement learning framework were by Can˜amero (1997a,b). We denote a homeostatic variable by h , where t identifies the dependency t of this variable on time. The organism’s full physiological state is captured by H = {h ,h ..h }, where h indicates the ith homeostatic variable. Each t 1,t 2,t N,t i,t homeostatic variable has a certain set point H(cid:63) = {h(cid:63),h(cid:63)..h(cid:63) } (Keramati and 1 2 N Gutkin, 2011). Furthermore, each homeostatic variable is affected by a set of external resources, associated to a particular action or state. For example, a particular homeostatic variable may increase upon resource consumption, and slightly decrease with every other action (Konidaris and Barto, 2006). More formally, denoting resource consumption by a¯ and the presence of a resource by s¯, a simple homeostatic dynamic would be (cid:40) h +ψ(s ,a ) if a ∈a¯,s ∈s¯ i,t t t t t h = (5) i,t+1 h −(cid:15) otherwise i,t for a resource effect of size ψ(s ,a ). We can also explicitly identify a drive as the t t difference between the current value and setpoint, i.e. d =|h(cid:63)−h | (Cos et al, i,t i i,t 2013). The overall drive of the system can then be specified by N N D = (cid:88) θ d = (cid:88) θ |h(cid:63)−h | (6) t i i,t i i i,t i=1 i=1 whereweintroducedθ tospecifytheweightorimportanceofthei-thhomeostatic i variable. Most examples take the absolute difference between current value and setpoint (i.e. the L norm) as shown above. However, we can consider the space 1 of homeostatic variables H ∈RN and in principle define any distance function in thisspacewithrespecttothereferencepointH(cid:63) (seee.g.Figure2foraEuclidean distance example). Theweightofeachhomeostaticvariable(θ )doesnotneedtobefixedintime. i For example, Konidaris makes it a non-linear function of the current homeostatic level h and a priority parameter ρ : θ =f(h ,ρ ). The former dependence i,t i,t i,t i,t i,t EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 11 Fig. 2 Schematicillustrationofhomeostasisanddrives.Thefigureshowsatwo-dimensional homeostatic space consisting (as an example) of energy (h1) and water level (h2). The set point(H(cid:63))indicatesthedesiredvaluesforthehomeostaticvariables.Atthecurrenttimepoint t the agent’s homeostatic status is Ht (red). The associated drive Dt can be visualize as the distancetothesetpoint.NotethatweusetheEuclideandistanceforthedrivehere(i.e.Dt= ||H(cid:63)−Ht||2),whilethetextdescribestheL1-normexample(i.e.Dt=||H(cid:63)−Ht||1,equation 6). We are free to choose any distance metric in homeostatic space. After taking an action the new homeostatic status becomes Ht+1 (green), in this case bringing both homeostatic levelsclosertotheirsetpoint.Thedifferencebetweenthedrivesatbothtimepointshasbeen associatedtorewardandjoy(seeSection6.1).FigurepartiallybasedonKeramatiandGutkin (2011). allowspriorities(i.e.rewards)toscalenon-linearlywiththesensoryinputlevels(an ideareminiscentofProspectTheory(KahnemanandTversky,1979)).Thepriority parameters ρ can be estimated online, for example assigning more importance i,t to resources which are harder to obtain (i.e. that should get priority earlier). As a finalnoteonhomeostaticRLsystems,notethatinternalvariablesneedtobepart of the state-space as well. One can either include all homeostatic variables and learngenericQ-values,orincludeonlythedominantdriveandlearndrive-specific Q-values (Konidaris and Barto,