”Machine Learning” manuscript No. (will be inserted by the editor) Emotion in Reinforcement Learning Agents and Robots: A Survey. Thomas M. Moerland · Joost Broekens · Catholijn M. Jonker Received:date/Accepted:date Abstract This article provides the first survey of computational models of emotion in reinforcement learning (RL) agents. The survey focuses on agent/robot emotions, and mostly ignores human user emotions. Emotions are recognized as functional in decision-making by influencing motivation and action selection. Therefore,computationalemotionmodelsareusuallygroundedintheagent’sdecisionmakingarchitecture,ofwhichRLisanimportantsubclass.Studyingemotions in RL-based agents is useful for three research fields. For machine learning (ML) researchers, emotion models may improve learning efficiency. For the interactive ML and human-robot interaction (HRI) community, emotions can communicate state and enhance user investment. Lastly, it allows affective modelling (AM) researchers to investigate their emotion theories in a successful AI agent class. This surveyprovidesbackgroundonemotiontheoryandRL.Itsystematicallyaddresses 1)fromwhatunderlyingdimensions(e.g.,homeostasis,appraisal)emotionscanbe derived and how these can be modelled in RL-agents, 2) what types of emotions have been derived from these dimensions, and 3) how these emotions may either influencethelearningefficiencyoftheagentorbeusefulassocialsignals.Wealso systematicallycompareevaluationcriteria,anddrawconnectionstoimportantRL sub-domainslike(intrinsic)motivationandmodel-basedRL.Inshort,thissurvey provides both a practical overview for engineers wanting to implement emotions in their RL agents, and identifies challenges and directions for future emotion-RL research. Keywords Reinforcement learning · Emotion · Motivation · Agent · Robot 1 Introduction This survey systematically covers the literature on computational models of emotioninreinforcementlearning(RL)agents.Computationalmodelsofemotionsare T.M.Moerland,J.Broekens,C.M.Jonker DelftUniversityofTechnology Mekelweg4,2628CD,Delft,TheNetherlands E-mail:{T.M.Moerland,D.J.Broekens,C.M.Jonker}@tudelft.nl 7102 yaM 51 ]GL.sc[ 1v27150.5071:viXra 2 Moerlandetal. usuallygroundedintheagentdecision-makingarchitecture.Inthisworkwefocus on emotion models in a successful learning architecture: reinforcement learning, i.e. agents optimizing some reward function in a Markov Decision Process (MDP) formulation.Todirectlyavoidconfusion:thetopicdoesnotimplytheagentshould ‘learnitsemotions’,i.e.emotionsareratherhookedoncharacteristicsoftheMDP (likevalueandtransitionfunctions),andmayforexamplewellpersistafterlearning has converged. One may question why it is useful to study emotions in machines at all. The computationalstudyofemotionsisanexampleofbio-inspirationincomputational science.Manyimportantadvancementsinmachinelearningandoptimizationwere based on biological principles, such as neural networks, evolutionary algorithms and swarm-based optimization (Russell et al, 1995). An example encountered in this survey is homeostasis, a concept closely related to emotions, and a biological principle that led researchers to implement goal switching in RL agents. The study of emotions in learning agents is useful for three research fields. First, for the machine learning (ML) community, emotions may benefit learning efficiency. For example, there are important connections to the work on (intrinsically) motivated RL. Second, researchers working on interactive machine learning and human-robot interaction (HRI) may benefit from emotions to enhance both transparency (i.e. communicate agent internal state) and user empathy. Finally, from an affective modelling (AM) perspective, where emotions are mostly studied in cognitive agents, RL agents provide the general benefits of the MDP formulation: these agents require few assumptions, can be applied to a variety of tasks without much prior knowledge, and, allow for learning. This also gives AM researchers access to complex, high-dimensional test domains to evaluate emotion theories. Emotion is an important part of human intelligence (Johnson-Laird and Oatley, 1992; Damasio, 1994; Baumeister et al, 2007). On the one hand, emotion has been defined as a response to a significant stimulus - characterized by brain and body arousal and a subjective feeling - that elicits a tendency towards motivated action (Calvo et al, 2014; Frijda et al, 1989). This emphasizes the relation of emotions with motivation and action. On the other hand, emotions have also been identified as complex feedback signals used to shape behaviour (Baumeister et al, 2007; Broekens et al, 2013). This view emphasizes the feedback function of emotion. The common ground in both: 1) emotions are related to action selection mechanisms and 2) emotion processing is in principle beneficial to the viability of the individual. As an illustration, Damasio (1994) showed that people with impaired emotional processing (due to brain damage) show failures in work and social life. These observations connecting emotions to action selection and adaptive decision-making sparked interest in the computer science community as well, mainly following the initial work by Can˜amero (1997b) and Gadanho and Hallam (1998). We wrote this survey for two reasons. First, while the topic of emotion in RL agents has received attention for nearly 20 years, it appears to fall in between the machine learning and affective modelling communities. In particular, there is no framework connecting the variety of models and implementations. Although Rumbell et al (2012) compared emotion models in twelve different agents, their work does not provide a full survey of the topic, nor does it focus on agents with a learning architecture. Our main aim is to establish such a framework, EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 3 hoping to bridge the communities and potentially align research agendas. As a second motivation, this survey is also useful to engineers working on social agents and robots. Emotion has an important functional role in social interaction and social robotics (Fong et al, 2003). Our survey is also a practical guideline for engineerswhowishtoimplementemotionalfunctionalityintheirRL-basedagents and robots. Asafinalnote,theterm‘reinforcementlearning’maybemisleadingtoreaders from a cognitive AI or psychological background. RL may reminisce of ‘instrumental conditioning’, with stimulus-response experiments on short time-scales. Althoughindeedrelated,RLherereferstothecomputationaltermforasuccessful class of algorithms solving Markov Decision Processes by sampling and learning