the categorical emotion implementations. Although the implementation for valence shows some consistency among papers, there is more difficulty to specify arousal or different emotion dimensions. Nevertheless, the continuous natureofdimensionalemotionmodelsremainsappealingfromanengineeringperspective. A possible benefit is the identification of a desirable target area in affective space, towards which the agent aims to progress (Guojiang et al, 2010). 20 Moerlandetal. Table 7 Overview of four categorical emotion (columns) elicitations for different papers (rows). The text in each cell specifies the elicitation condition. We observe different categories of emotion elicitation, i.e. homeostatic (blue, Section 4.1), appraisal (green, 4.2) and value-based(red,4.3).Weseehowsingleemotionsareconnectedtodifferentelicitationmethods(multiplecoloursinsinglecolumn)andhowsinglepapersusedifferentelicitationmethods (multiplecoloursinsinglerow). Happy/Joy Sad/Distress Fear Anger (Gadanhoand Highenergy Lowenergy Pain High Hallam,1998) restlessness (lowprogress) (Goerke,2006) Alldriveslow - Homesick& Hunger& lowenergy homesick& highenergy (Kimand Goal Nogoal Pain Noprogress Kwon,2010) achievement achievement (Williams Progress& - Pain&novelty - etal,2015) control&low pain (Salichsand Positivedelta Negativedelta Worst - Malfaz,2012) well-being well-being historical Q(s,a) (Moerland PositiveTD NegativeTD Anticipated - etal,2016) negativeTD (Shietal, Increasing - Increasing Decreasing 2012) positivereward negative positivereward reward (Yuetal, High Egoisticagent Agentdefects Agent 2015) well-being &low &others co-orperates& well-being co-orperate othersdefect Table 8 Overviewofdimensionalemotionimplementations. Dimensional Paper emotion Valence (Kuremoto et al, 2013) (Ahn and Picard, 2006) (Zhang and Liu, 2009) (Broekensetal,2007a)(Broekens,2007)(Obayashietal,2012)(Hogewoningetal,2007)(Hoeyetal,2013)(Guojiangetal,2010)(Coutinhoetal, 2005) Arousal (Kuremotoetal,2013)(Obayashietal,2012)(Ayesh,2004)(Hoeyetal, 2013)(Guojiangetal,2010)(Coutinhoetal,2005) Control (Hoeyetal,2013) 6 Emotion function We now discuss the ways in which emotions may influence the learning loop. It turnsoutemotionshavebeenimplicatedwithallmainaspectsofthisloop:Reward (6.1), State (6.2), Adaptive Critic (6.3) and Actor (6.4). Finally, emotion has also been studied as an epiphenomenon, i.e. without any effect on the learning loop, but for example to communicate the learning/behavioural process to other social companions (6.5). These categories are visualized in Figure 1 (labels I-V). Note thatthisSectionintroducesthewaysinwhichemotionmayinfluencetheRLloop EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 21 on a conceptual level. We summarize the resulting effect, for example on learning efficiency, in Section 7. 6.1 Reward modification AlargegroupofemotionalRLimplementationsuseemotionstomodifythereward function. These approaches add an additive term to the reward function that relies on emotions (we have only encountered additive specifications). The reward function is given by r =r˜ +r(cid:52) (15) t t t where r˜(t) denotes the external reward function and r(cid:52)(t) an internal reward based on emotional mechanisms. In the RL community, Eq. 15 is known as reward shaping(Ngetal,1999).Theinternalrewardcanbetargetedatmaximizing positive emotions, but is also frequently associated to homeostatic variables or appraisal dimensions (see Sections 4.1 and 4.2 for elicitation). However, the general underlying principle usually remains that agents seek to maximize positive emotions and minimize negative emotions. Homeostasis. Forhomeostaticsystemstherewardbecomesdependentonthecurrent state of the internal homeostatic variables. Some implementations use the difference in overall well-being, r(cid:52) =W −W =D −D (16) t t t−1 t−1 t wherethestepfromwell-beingW tooveralldriveD naturallyfollowsfromEquation (7). In this specification, the acquisition of food does not provide any reward iftheassociatedhomeostaticvariable(e.g.energy/sugarlevel)isalreadysatiated. Implementations of the above idea can be found in (Gadanho and Hallam, 2001), (Salichs and Malfaz, 2012) and (Cos et al, 2013). Variants of this have focussed on using positive emotions (instead of well-being) as the reinforcement learning signal, e.g. in (Gadanho and Hallam, 1998) and (Goerke, 2006). Appraisal-based. Similar ideas are used for appraisal-based reward modifications. SomeexamplesofappraisaldimensionspecificationswerediscussedinSection4.2, with some formal examples in Equations 9-13. Appraisal dimensions are related to generic concepts of the agent history (novelty, recency, consistency of observations with world model) and expectations with respect to the goal (motivational relevance,intrinsicpleasantness).Severalstudiesintheintrinsicallymotivatedreinforcement learning literature have identified the learning and survival benefit of thesedimensions(OudeyerandKaplan,2007;Oudeyeretal,2007).Someauthors therefore took appraisal theory as an inspiration to develop intrinsic motivation features. Specifications in this direction therefore usually take the following form: J r(cid:52) = (cid:88) φ ζ (g ) (17) t j j t j=1 22 Moerlandetal. for J appraisal variables and φ denoting the weight of the j-th appraisal dimenj sion. We could for example use the two features in Equations 9-10, specifying an agent that gets rewarded for motivational relevance and recency. Note that appraisal specifications usually do not include the difference with (t−1), probably because they are usually assumed not to satiate (i.e. no underlying homeostatic dynamics). We also note that a reward bonus for novelty (e.g. as in Eq. 12) is in the RL literature usually referred to as ‘optimism in the face of uncertainty’, i.e. we want to explore where we have not been yet. Sequeira et al (2011) actually tries to optimize the vector of weights φ (with respect to overall goal achievement). In a more recent publication, Sequeira et al (2014) also extends this work to actually learn the required appraisal dimensions through genetic programming. Similar ideas can be found in Marinier and Laird (2008). One of the problems with both implementations is the distance-to-goal heuristicusedbybothemotion-basedagents,whichhasaccesstoadditionalinformationcomparedtothebaselineagent(althoughtheheuristicdoesnotmonotonically increase with the actual distance to goal). We discuss the empirical results of these papers more systematically in Section 7. 6.2 State modification Emotionshavealsobeenusedaspartofthestate-space(learningemotionspecific value functions and policies). An example is the social robot Maggie (CastroGonza´lez et al, 2013). When fear is elicited it becomes part of the state-space (replacing the dominant drive in a homeostatic system), which makes Maggie