(social) interaction(Tanakaetal,2004)(MoussaandMagnenat-Thalmann,2013)oroccurs at appropriate states in the scenario (Moerland et al, 2016). Altogether, results in this category show that emotion in RL agents might be a viable tool to study emotion theories in computational settings. Human-robotinteraction. Finally,athirdgroupofresearchersfocussesonhumanrobot interaction evaluation. Their primary focus is to show how emotions may benefit social interaction with humans, usually by taking questionnaires with the participantsaftertheexperiment.ParticipantsofFicocellietal(2015)reportmore effectivecommunication,participantsofEl-Nasretal(2000)foundtheagentmore convincing, and participants of Shibata et al (1997) report an increased notion of connection as well as increased perception of robot intelligence. Kim and Kwon (2010) describe an enhanced pleasant feeling of the participant after the humanagent interaction. Therefore, there is clear indication that emotion in RL agents maybenefitaninteractivelearningsetting.However,therearerelativelyfewpapers in this category compared to the other two, and this may be a direction for more research. 8 Discussion This article surveyed the available work on emotion and reinforcement learning in agents and robots, by systematically categorizing emotion elicitation, type and function in RL agents. We first summarize the main results and identify the challenges encountered throughout the article. Emotions have been elicited from extrinsic motivation (in combination with homeostasis), intrinsic motivation (in combination with appraisal), value and reward functions and as hard-wired implementation. We want to emphasize again thatextrinsicmotivationandhomeostasisarenotsynonyms,norareintrinsicmotivations and appraisal (see Section 3). The hard-wired emotion elicitation seems least useful, as it does not provide any deeper understanding about emotion generation, and is by definition hand-crafted to the task. The other three elicitation EmotioninReinforcementLearningAgentsandRobots:ASurvey. 27 methods are useful and appear to address different aspects of emotions. Homeostasis focusses on the inner resource status, appraisal on the inner model status and value/reward focusses on the learning process. They seem to cover different aspectsofemotions.Forexample,surpriseseemsonlyelicitablefromamodel,joy fromfoodrequiresextrinsicmotivationandhomeostasis,whileaspectslikeanticipated change need value functions. Finally, note that there remains slight overlap among categories, i.e. they serve as a framework, but are not mutually exclusive. This is also illustrated by the overlap among implementations in Table 7. Regarding emotion types we observed a relatively larger corpus of categorical implementations than dimensional models. Although dimensional models are appealing from an engineering perspective, they are usually implemented in 1D (valence) or 2D (valence-arousal) space. This makes it challenging to implement a diverse set of emotions. We do want to present a hypothesis here: dimensional and categorical emotions may fit into the same framework, but at different levels. Concepts like ‘well-being’, as encountered throughout this survey, do not appear tobecategoricalemotions,butcouldbeinterpretedasvalence.However,anagent can have categorical emotions on top of a well-being/valence system, joining both emotion types in one system. Similarly, arousal could be related to the speed of processing of the RL loop, also entering the RL process at a different level. Finally, emotion function could involve nearly every node in the RL loop: reward, state, value function and action selection. It seems like all approaches are useful, as each element targets a different RL challenge. The fifth emotion function category (epiphenomenon) should get more attention because it involves a different kind of usefulness (communicative). Although quite some papers are focussing on emotion dynamics, there is less work on evaluating the potential of emotions to communicate the learning process. Thomaz and Breazeal (2006) found that transparency of the learner’s internal process (in their case through the robot’s gaze direction) can improve the human’s teaching. We hypothesize emotionalcommunicationtoexpressinternalstatemayserveasimilarrole,which is a topic that could get more research attention in the future. Advice for implementation. Weexpectthisarticleisusefultoengineerswhowant toimplementemotionalfunctionalityintheirRL-basedagentorrobot.Weadvise to first consider what type of functionality is desired. When the goal is to have emotions visualize agent state, or have believable emotions to enhance empathy anduserinvestment,thenemotionscanbeimplementedasanepiphenomenon(i.e. focusonSections4and5).Thereadercouldforexamplefirstdecideonthedesired emotiontypes,andthencheckwhichavailableelicitationmethodsseemapplicable (e.g.viaTable9).Whenonedesiresemotionfunctionintheiragent/robotaswell, thenSection6becomesrelevant.Weadvisethereadertofirstconsiderthedesired functionality, e.g. a more adaptive reward function, learning parameter tuning, or modulated exploration, and then work ‘backwards’ to emotion type and emotion elicitation.Readersmayverifywhetherthereareexistingimplementationsoftheir requirements through the colour coding in Table 9. Ingeneral,webelieveresearchersinthefieldshouldstartfocussingonintegratingapproaches.Thissurveyintendedtoprovideaframeworkandcategorizationof emotion elicitation and function, but it seems likely that these categories actually jointly occur in the behavioural loop. We look forward to systems that integrate multipleapproaches.Moreover,wewanttoemphasizethepaperbyWilliamsetal 28 Moerlandetal. (2015) that took a fully learned approach. Their system contains nodes that were trainedfortheirfunctionalbenefit,andlateroncharacterizedfortheemotionpatterns.Weexpectsuchanapproachtobothbemorerobustagainstthecomplexity problems encountered when developing integrated systems, and to transfer more easily between problem settings as well. Testingandqualityofthefield. Wealsosystematicallycategorizedthetestingscenariosandevaluationcriteria(Section7andTable10).Thereareseveralpointsto be noted about the current testing. First we want to stress a point already made by Can˜amero (2003), who noted that ‘one should not put more emotion in the agentthanwhatisrequiredbythecomplexityofthesystem-environmentinteraction’. Many of the current implementations design their own (grid) world. While these artificial worlds are usually well-suited to assess optimization behaviour, it isfrequentlyhardtoassesswhichemotionsshouldbeelicitedbytheagentateach point in the world. On the other hand, more realistic scenarios quickly become high-dimensional, and therefore the challenge changes to a representation learning problem. Potentially, the advances in solving more complex AI scenarios with (deep) RL (Silver et al, 2016; Mnih et al, 2015) may provide more realistic test scenarios in the future as well. There are two other important observations regarding testing and evaluation. We have not encountered any (emotional)