cause difficulties in constructing a model that accurately reflects the population from whichthedataisdrawn,negativelyimpactinggeneralizableperformance[30–32]. While muchofthe standardnoisecanbe attributedto dataqualityissues,it is important to highlight the need for data understanding in the preprocessing step. In particular,with relationto outliers. There are over100 different discordancy/outlier tests whose use can depend on factors such as data distribution, whether distribution parameters are known, and even the number and type of 8 Feldman et al. the expected outliers [33]. As such, preprocessing noisy data presents a significant challenge, as incorrectly applying data cleaning techniques can result in large variations in the finalized dataset. Looking to other sources of noise, the nature of potential physiological artifactsrequiresadditionalconsiderationsduringdatapreprocessing.The presence of an artifact does not necessitate the value be incorrect, though similarly to outliers, failure to remove such data has far reaching implications as such data presents “a milder form of training data error that can cause reduced accuracy” [34]. However,unlike outliers, these artifacts are often difficult to broadly and statistically discern from true signals without clinical insight. Finally, in addition to the data quality concerns already discussed, noise resulting from the variability of the systems which collect data presents a distinct concern during processing. Due to the resulting intra-instance variability, there exists the case in which two instances with identical feature values present two different classes or outcomes. Whereas such instances are often removed,within healthcare, such a scenario is quite common and may represent a legitimate aspect of variability with a patient’s health. This in turn, introduces a considerable amount of uncertainly into the system, representing an inherent problem to separability. Missingness Just as the numerous sources of noise present a challenge to the effective processing ofhealthcaredata,so too do the manyforms in which missing data canmanifest acrossthe domain. At anattribute-level, data is typically classified as missing in one of three forms: completely at random (MCAR), at random (MAR), and not at random (MNAR). Although all forms of missingess present a concern, the various forms of missingness can present significantly different considerations during the processing of a dataset. While data missing completelyatrandom(MCAR)presentsminimalconcerntothe underlyingdistribution,allowingfordatatobedroppedorimputedwithoutworryofintroducingadditionalbiases,suchascenarioisoftenunrealistic.Rather,dataistypically missing due to an underlying, sometimes unobserved,pattern known as missing at random (MAR) or missing not at random (MNAR), each of which may requiretechniques suchasmaximumlikelihoodestimationormultiple imputation to help address the inherent bias they present to the data collected [35–37]. In comparison,bothmethodstendtoyieldsimilarresultswhenimplementedinthe same way, however, performance gains in efficiency and reduced bias regarding these methods relateto the inclusionofauxiliaryvariables[38].The inclusionof data to these methods, even that which is irrelevant to the objective at hand, suggests the amount of data included in these methods is of equal importance to the methods themselves. Beyond the type of missingness, the quantity of missing information further influences the preproccessing of data. With respect to the occurrences of large temporalgaps,wefindthatalthoughmathematicallywemaybeabletoimpute, model and predict estimations of missing values during processing there is no guarantee the values computed accurately reflect the true condition of the in- The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 9 dividual during that time period. This consideration is particularly relevant in light of the common scenario where data is collected during a subjects clinical encounters, each of which may occur months apart. Finally, building on the concerns of temporal missingess, commonly associated with longitudinal studies, missingness by attrition, presents a number of additional considerations to effective preprocessing of data. Work by Graham suggests attrition-related missingness focuses on the program (or treatment) P, the dependent Y, and the interaction between these two: PY [39]. Just as the MCAR/MAR/MNAR nomenclature providesa roadmapto the appropriate preprocessingtechniques, identifying and assessingwhich of the possible combinations of these three factors causes missingess to arise presents a critical step in improving the ability to address bias during the processing of such data. Variability in Language The variability brought on by the breath of coding standards presents a fundamental obstacle in the effective preprocessing of healthcare data. Although an underlying condition may be the same across two distinctrepresentations,withthemultitude ofvaluesacrosseachofthedifferent codingstandards,ithasbecomenearlyimpossibletoaccuratelycreateacomprehensive mapping to translate between each standard. However, such a mapping is critical for unifying disparate data sources during the processing stage of the machine learning pipeline. Further, although data may stay consistent with respect to a single coding standard, temporal changes in how these codes are assigned can still occur as a result of changing regulations, or even revisions within the standard [40]. Presentingsimilarobstaclesaswithmultiple codingstandards,thesechanges,more formally defined by the notion of concept drift, cause models built on old data to become inconsistent with new data as the models inputs and target variable change over time [11]. While such a shift is extremely difficult to identify, it is critically important, as such discrepancies make it not only difficult to understand values, but have the potential to add ambiguity during its processing [41]. In particular,changes in the code frequencies, which are often used during preprocessing and data exploration, may be attributed