and quantity of the input parameters and the accuracy of the auxiliary hypotheses” [55].Inactuality,whatthesesentimentcaptureis the needtoconstructamodel insucha waythatitaccuratelyrepresentsthe system(validation)andaccounts for the technical correctness of the model itself (verification) [8]. 5.1 Manifestation in Healthcare Together,validationandverificationrepresentacriticalaspectofcomputational toolssuchasmachinelearningsimpactonoursociety.However,accurateassessment of either measure proves a nontrivial task in its own right. Difficulties associated with validation and verification are grounded by two district ideas whichgovernbothmeasures.First,thatthereexistsa groundtruth,andsecond that any ground truth provided is correct. While both of these assumptions are difficult to guarantee for any real-world data, they are particularly relevant to the variability of data across the healthcare domain. The first concern represents a variant of the partially labeled data problem, formally defined by Szummer [56]. As noted in the Preprocessing section, although missing values are commonly treated as negative, such an assumption is dangerous. Diagnoses that are never recorded or identified can present the scenario in which two individuals may appear the same from a record standpoint,but infactpresentsignificantlydifferentclinicaloutcomes.Further,there is a well-established issue in the ability to record clinical conditions completely within any particular coding languages [57]. Thus, in an effort to address this lackofagroundtruthformissingdiagnoses,manymachinelearningapproaches utilize only positive entities, in essence, formulating a one-class problem. 14 Feldman et al. This inturn leadsto the secondpoint ofconcern,where eveninthe scenario in which a diagnosis is recorded, such data is not guaranteed to be correct. As diagnosisinformation is often obtained thougha diagnostic test, it is important to remember these tests are subjective. Each test is associated with its own performance range quantified by metrics such as sensitivity and specificity, predictive values,chance-correctedmeasuresofagreement,orlikelihoodratios[58]. Without the ability to identify false positives/negatives, or to link to follow-up tests or corrections, these results represent a significant source of error which can propagate through an algorithmic model. 5.2 Implications to Machine Learning Thechallengesassociatedwiththevalidationandverificationofhealthcaredata impactfarmorethanapplication-specificperformance,reachingtotheintermittent steps of the algorithms underlying the solutions themselves. In particular, the complexities of healthcare data impacts both the internal distance metric utilized, as well as the generalized optimization problem of parameter tuning. Although simplistic in definition, the notion of distance represents a fundamental attribute in the execution of machine learning algorithms. The ability to quantify a pair of similar or dissimilar points is a concept utilized in determining decision boundaries, as well as updates for weights. Such a concept has become increasingly important as a result of the heterogeneity exhibited by the growing set of healthcare data discussed prior. While work by Brian Kulis highlights extensions of the metric learning problems to a variety of problems in computer vision, text analysis, and multimedia, these extensions represent nontrivial altercations to the concept of what constitutes distance [59]. Fromanoptimizationstandpoint,inanefforttomoreaccuratelymodelcomplex real-world systems, an increasingly complex set of learning models have become available. Although these models have the potential to improve performance, there often exist a number of parameters (regularization strengths, number of weak learners,slack variables)that must be tuned to fit the data beingmodeled[60,61].While specificsoftheirimplementationcanvarygreatly,to preventtheneedtosweeptheentiretyoftheparameterspace,amodel’sparameters can be estimated through optimization techniques applied to an objective function of the users choosing. As there exist a range of possible optimizations, many stemming from a methodology known as gradient decent, an understanding of the data itself is paramount. Variability in how the specified objective function accounts for factors suchas class imbalance orinter-feature correlation can result in markedly different results drawn from the same data [62–64]. Finally, it is important to note that validation and verification have often constituted major components in the assessment of model output, for both its generalizabilityandoverallcorrectness.While criticalto their real-worldutility, these concerns directly impact the inferences drawn from model output, and as such,existoutsidethescopeofthischapter.Anexcellentsurveyaddressingsuch items can be found in the work by Sokolova and Lapalme [65]. The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 15 6 Open Problems This work has served as a foundation highlighting a broad set of considerations that must be addressed as machine learning works to establish its place in the healthcare industry. However, as clinical practice, administration, and research becomes increasingly intertwined with the statistical methodologies of machine learning,thereremainsanumberofopenproblems.Inthe sectionstofollow,we discuss a subset of the most pressing and active areas of research. 6.1 Temporal Relations As healthcare data has undergone the transition from a paper-based entity to digital records, much of the focus has fallen to the purely technical aspects of storing, processing, and modeling such a complex set of variables. Amongst these considerations,however,we often forgetto reflect on whether the data we consume accuratelyreflects the processesitcaptures.Inparticular,wefind that anoverwhelmingmajority ofworkshave recordedand modeledthe conditionof an individual as a set of discrete observations. Although such an approach allows for data to be easily consumed by traditional machine learning approaches, formalizing the presence of each entity recorded as a feature, such a representation is incomplete. It is clear observations such as a diagnosis or procedure must occur at a single point in time, however, it would be naive to believe that such elements of health occur in isolation. Rather, there exist temporal relations