0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 CPT Sparsity and Imbalance ICD Variability in Standards Fig.1. Fundamental challenges to the machine learning pipeline resulting from the complexity of healthcare data 4 Feldman et al. 2 Glossary and Key Terms Preprocessing:Aprocessintendedtoaddressthenoisy,missing,andinconsistent propertiesofreal-worlddata,improvingdata qualitypriorto modeling.Preprocessingisoftenthefirststepinthemachinelearningpipelineandischaracterized by techniques such as cleaning, integration, reduction, and transformation [5]. Modeling: The second stage of the machine learning pipeline, modeling focuses on the construction of statistical, probabilistic models intended to learn representationsofthe vastamounts ofdata collected.Suchmodels areusedto detect patterns in data and potentially use the patterns to predict future data [6]. Evaluation: Performed on the artifacts produced by modeling, evaluation forms the final stage of the pipeline, establishing the model’s predictive efficacy, complexity, technical correctness, and ease with which it can be understood [7]. Validation: The process of evaluating a model in its ability to accurately represent the observed system [8]. Verification: The process of evaluating whether data manipulation and model construction were accomplished with technical correctness [8]. Medical Coding: The systematic classification of data into alphanumeric codes fortheidentificationofdiagnoses,procedures,medications,laboratorytests,and other clinical attributes [9]. Sparsity:Occurswhenonlyasmallpercentage(typically<1%)ofattributesfor an instance are non-zero [10]. Concept Drift: The notion that inputs or outcomes related to a model may change overtime in unexpected manners reducing the accuracy of models as the data streams change [11]. 3 Preprocessing Just as clinicians require quick and accurate information to provide care at the highest level, the need to collect and produce high quality data has become paramount for applications of machine learning as they continue to integrate intoaspectsofcarepertainingtohealthandhumanbehavior.However,whilethe goalis clear,the rapidinflux ofnew data,and the evolvingnature ofhealthcare itself offers a significant set of challenges. In this regard, the following sections present an overview to the considerations of preprocessing data collected across the healthcare domain. 3.1 Manifestation in Healthcare Whilethechallengestopreprocessingarepresentinmanydomains,thedynamics of healthcare necessitate that care be taken to address a number of biological, computational, and representational aspects of data. These can range from the The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 5 filtration of noise, to the need to navigate a multitude of coding standards. The following sections will begin by highlighting scenarios from which these challenges arise. Noise The presence of incorrect or irrelevant data, otherwise known as noise, representsafundamentalcomponentofworkingwithanyreal-worlddata.Healthcareisnoexception,andarisingfromanimperfectdatacollectionprocess,commonoccurrencesofnoisecanincludemissingvalues,misspellings,abbreviations, misfieldedvalues,wordtranspositions,andduplicatedorconflictingrecords[12]. The presenceofnoisestemsfrommorethanjustdataqualityissues,itmayalso arise from the natural variation among individuals. Given a population of instances, a small sample may appear inconsistent with the rest i.e. “outliers”. Next,itisimportanttorememberthatnoiseispresentnotonlyintherecording ofdata,but in its measurementas well.Healthcare is currently entering unchartedterritory.While traditionallythegenerationofhealthdatawasconfined withinthewallsofaclinicalsetting,advancingtechnologyhasallowedforcollection from a variety of sources. These range in complexity from personal health tools, to clinically focused devices, to total wireless sensor networks, to home monitoringsystems[13–15].However,with developmentfromanumberofmanufacturers, utilizing a range of algorithmic techniques for their data collection andapproximation,thequalityofthisdatahasbeendrawnintoquestion[16,17]. A scenario highlighted by Bland and Altman, who note that “several measurements ofthe samequantity onthe samesubjectwillnotingeneralbe the same. This may be because of natural variation in the subject, variation in the measurement process, or both” [18]. Finally, we find that beyond the collection and recording of health data, there exists a more complex source of noise known as artifacts. Artifacts result not from data collection or variability in subjects, but from the physiological processeswhichgeneratethe dataitself, manifesting as whatappearsto be normal data. Although, in reality, such feature values are not generated by the intended source (e.g. electrical signals from the brain collected by an electroencephalogram). Instead, this data is generated by alternative biological mechanisms including cardiac, glossokinetic, muscle, eye movements, respiratory and pulse variations [19]. Missingness Theoccurrenceofmissingdataisanalmostunavoidableproblem for any domain, including healthcare [20]. Missing data can result from a number of processes, ranging from fundamental attributes of data collection to the inherent ambiguity and variability of an individual’s health condition. At the most basic level, as with all studies that involve the collection of information from individuals, there exists the possibility of missing data attributes due to a subjectsfailuretorespondcompletely,aswellastheinabilitytoassessallpossibleclinicalandsocialattributesastheypertaintoeachindividual.Additionally, missingdataisnotrestrictedtoparticularattributes,butcanariseonabroader scale with attrition of an entire instance during longitudinal data collection. In 6 Feldman et al. addition to the to the lack of data, such a scenario presents difficultly during processing as the reason for dropping may be linked to attributes of the study design, a trend which may go unnoticed without closer investigation [21]. The evolvingdigitalnatureofhealthcarepresentsitsownsetofchallengesinregards tothepresenceofmissingdata.Fromacollectionstandpoint,monitoringdevices mayfailor become disconnected,data maybecome corrupt,or compatibilityissues may result in the inability to collect data, resulting in large gaps of the recorded data [22]. Moreover, even in the scenario in which data collection occurs as expected, missingesscantakeotherforms.Lookingtothe frequencyofclinicalencounters, it may occur from a temporal standpoint. With the exception of some critical care,patients are rarelyunder continuous observation,instead, many may meet with their physicians as infrequently as twice a year. These gaps in observation and records may allow for fluctuations in health to go undocumented, leaving only brief snapshots of the patients condition. Further, missingness can occur due to the fragmented nature of the entities collecting the data. Healthcare data comes not only from hospitals