collect data, resulting in large gaps of the recorded data [22]. Moreover, even in the scenario in which data collection occurs as expected, missingesscantakeotherforms.Lookingtothe frequencyofclinicalencounters, it may occur from a temporal standpoint. With the exception of some critical care,patients are rarelyunder continuous observation,instead, many may meet with their physicians as infrequently as twice a year. These gaps in observation and records may allow for fluctuations in health to go undocumented, leaving only brief snapshots of the patients condition. Further, missingness can occur due to the fragmented nature of the entities collecting the data. Healthcare data comes not only from hospitals and primary care centers, but a variety of sources, be that specialists visited, community programs, or even physical trackers [14,23]. However, despite the various data sources collecting data relevant to the overall profile of an individuals health, data integration and sharing considerations often provide only a small portion of data to any one source. Finally, it is important to note a distinction between missing data and negative values as it relates to a perhaps non-traditional concept of missingness. Unlikedomainssuchasretail,wherethe purchaseofanitemcanbe represented in a binary fashion (purchased or not), the lack of affirmation for a particular entityinhealthcaredatadoesnotnecessitateanegativecase.Lookingtodisease diagnoses, a patient may in fact have a particular condition, for which they are never formally diagnosed, or for which the diagnosis code is not recorded, as is the case with often under-reported diagnoses such as obesity [24]. Variability in Language Another challenge in processing healthcare data stems not from a function of its quality, but from its representation. In an effort to quantify and standardize the vast set of possible conditions, procedures, and clinical elements, a myriad of medical coding schemes have been developed,including the InternationalClassificationof Diseases(ICD), SystematizedNomenclature of Medicine (SNOMED), CurrentProceduralTerminology (CPT), Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS), LOINC, Europe’s Classification of Surgical Operations and Procedures (OPCS), and the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) to name a few. In fact, as the number of standards continues to increase there is a considerable amount of overlap between them. As a result, effective processing of such data must take care to consider the possibility where the same attribute may be represented in multiple ways. This situation is exacerbated by the nature of The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 7 healthcaresystems,whereinresponsetodocumentationorreportingstandards, multiple coding standards may be used even within the same institution. Not only does variability arise from the use of different coding standards, but from emerging diversity as these standards are revised and updated. As an example,the ICD’s latestrevision(ICD-10)broughtwith it roughly55,000new diagnostic codes and over 68,000 new procedural codes [25]. Although this increased feature space allows for representation of conditions at a much greater specificity, coalescing codes across revisions during processing presents a significant challenge. Further, although mappings have been created to assist in the transitionbetweencodes,theyarenotuniveralandoftenincomplete.TheWorkgroupforElectronicData Exchangesuggest“healthcareorganizationsuse these mappings as starting points to develop their own, more precise data crosswalk applications between ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes” [26]. While variability is clearly a product of the expansive set of coding standardsandtheirrevisions,italsoresultsfromthemethodologyofmedicalcoding itself. Medical coding is a subjective process, the accuracy of which has been shown to be dependent on the clinical record of the condition observed, as well as the interpretation of the diagnostic codes themselves [27]. While it may be straightforward for simple cases where a patient is assigned a single diagnosis, inconsistencies from coders and institutions have been found to increase with the complexity of a patient’s condition, specifically when they receive multiple diagnoses [28]. 3.2 Implications to Machine Learning Noted by Cortes et. al, “insufficiencies of the data limit the performance of any learning machine or other statistical tool constructed from and applied to the data collection - no matter how complex the machine or how much data is used totrainit”[29].Asaresult,itisimperativetounderstandnotonlytheprocesses fromwhichpreprocessingchallengesarisewithinthehealthcaredomain,butalso the implications to the preprocessing phase of the machine learning pipeline. A discussion to each consideration can be found in the sections below. Noise As applicationsofmachinelearningcontinueto expandintonewaspects of healthcare, the processing of noisy data has become a central component of many works. From a theoretical perspective, prior work has established fundamentals of what defines learning, and concepts of model consistency. Together, these constructs help illustrate how failure to process noise in data can cause difficulties in constructing a model that accurately reflects the population from whichthedataisdrawn,negativelyimpactinggeneralizableperformance[30–32]. While muchofthe standardnoisecanbe attributedto dataqualityissues,it is important to highlight the need for data understanding in the preprocessing step. In particular,with relationto outliers. There are over100 different discordancy/outlier tests whose use can depend on factors such as data distribution, whether distribution parameters are known, and even the number and type of 8 Feldman et al. the expected outliers [33]. As such, preprocessing noisy data presents a significant challenge, as incorrectly applying data cleaning techniques can result in large variations in the finalized dataset. Looking to other sources of