8102 naJ 62 ]YC.sc[ 2v31510.6071:viXra Beyond Volume: The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on the Machine Learning Pipeline 1 1 1 Keith Feldman Louis Faust Xian Wu 1 1 Chao Huang and Nitesh V. Chawla Universityof NotreDame, NotreDame, IN, USA {kfeldman,lfaust,xwu9,chuang7,nchawla}@nd.edu Abstract. From medical charts to national census, healthcare has traditionally operated under a paper-based paradigm. However, the past decade has marked a long and arduous transformation bringing healthcareintothedigital age. Rangingfrom electronic healthrecords, todigitized imaging and laboratory reports, to public health datasets, today, healthcare now generates an incredible amount of digital information. Such a wealth of data presents an exciting opportunity for integrated machine learning solutions to address problems across multiple facets of healthcare practice and administration. Unfortunately, the ability to derive accurate and informative insights requires more than the ability to execute machine learning models. Rather, a deeper understanding of the data on which the models are run is imperative for their success. While a significant effort has been undertaken to develop models able to process the volume of data obtained during the analysis of millions of digitalized patient records, it is important to remember that volume representsonlyoneaspectofthedata.Infact,drawingondatafrom an increasingly diverse set of sources, healthcare data presents an incredibly complex set of attributes that must be accounted for throughout themachinelearningpipeline.Thischapterfocusesonhighlightingsuch challenges,andisbrokendownintothreedistinctcomponents,eachrepresenting a phase of the pipeline. We begin with attributes of the data accounted for during preprocessing, then move to considerations during model building, and end with challenges to the interpretation of model output. For each component, we present a discussion around data as it relates to the healthcare domain and offer insight into the challenges each may impose on theefficiency of machine learning techniques. Keywords: HealthcareInformatics,MachineLearning,KnowledgeDiscovery 1 Introduction Only in its infancy as a digital entity, the healthcare industry has undergone a significant transition over the past decade from a paper-based domain to one 2 Feldman et al. operating primarily through a digital medium. Beyond the logistical benefits of maintainingandorganizingpatients’medicalrecords,theabilitytoquicklyidentifyandprocessinformationfrommillionsofpatientrecords,laboratoryreports, imaging procedures, payment claims, and public health databases has brought the industry to the precipice of a significant change. Namely, the opportunity to utilize data science and machine learning methodologies to address problems across the practice and administration of healthcare. In fact, utilization of such analytic techniques has provided a foundation on which models of personalized and predictive care have emerged [1]. These modelsrepresentamyriadofopportunitiesfromimprovedpatientstratification, toidentifyingnoveldiseasecomorbiditiesanddruginteractions,totheprediction of clinical outcomes [2]. However, while such applications hold great promise for the healthcare industry, the application of machine learning methodologies faces a significant set of obstacles intrinsic to the data being evaluated and the population from which the data is drawn. Since its entrance into the digital era,the increasing scale and scope of data has placed great emphasis on the advent of Big Data in healthcare and the challengesthatcome withit. With anestimated150exabytesofdatagenerated by2011,earlyworkaddressedthechallengesofprocessingdataatsuchascale[3]. However,itisimportanttorememberthatBigDataisdefinedbymorethanjust size,but rather by whatareknownas the four V’s (The Volume, orquantity of dataavailable.TheVelocity,orspeedatwhichthedataiscreated.TheVariety of the data elements available. And the Veracity, or inherent truthfulness of dataitself)[4].Withadvancementstothetheoreticalunderpinningandpractical implementationsofmachinelearningalgorithmsprovidingtheabilitytoconsume andanalyzeeventhe largestclinicalandbiomedicaldatasets,the challengenow falls not to the size of the data, but its complexity. Instarkcontrasttotheidealisticdataonwhichmachinelearningalgorithms are theoried, healthcare data is inherently fragmented, noisy, high-dimensional, and heterogeneous. With the influx of data from an increasingly varied set of sources, it has become clear that effective utilization of these techniques will require more than accessibility of data or ability to execute Big Data analytics. As clinical research becomes increasingly intertwined with the statistical methodologiesof datascience,effective applicationsrequire anawarenessto the mechanisms by which the data is created, processed, and analyzed. To this end, the following chapter will address the complexities of healthcaredata asthey impactthe machinelearningalgorithmswhichconsumethem. Broadly, we break such work into three major categories, each representing a componentofthemachinelearningpipeline,asseeninFigure1.Beginningwith preprocessing, we will discuss attributes of the data itself through the concepts ofnoise,missingness,andvariabilityinlanguage.Wewillthenmovetothemodeling phase, discussing considerations such as the heterogeneity of data sources, sparsity and class imbalance. Finally, we will look to the model output, discussing the concepts of validation and verification. We will conclude with some general recommendations and a review of the open problems. The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 3 ICD-10-PCS MC-01-DCI ICD9-CM DEMONS SCPCH OPCS MSD IHCI Preprocessing Modeling Evaluation Missing Data Heterogeneity Validation & Verification Data Noise 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 CPT Sparsity and Imbalance ICD Variability in Standards Fig.1. Fundamental challenges to the machine learning pipeline resulting from the complexity of healthcare data 4 Feldman et al. 2 Glossary and Key Terms Preprocessing:Aprocessintendedtoaddressthenoisy,missing,andinconsistent propertiesofreal-worlddata,improvingdata qualitypriorto modeling.Preprocessingisoftenthefirststepinthemachinelearningpipelineandischaracterized by techniques such as cleaning, integration, reduction, and transformation [5]. Modeling: The second stage of the machine learning pipeline, modeling focuses on the construction of statistical, probabilistic models intended to learn representationsofthe vastamounts ofdata collected.Suchmodels areusedto detect patterns in data and potentially use the patterns to predict future data [6]. Evaluation: Performed on the artifacts