of variables. Amongst these considerations,however,we often forgetto reflect on whether the data we consume accuratelyreflects the processesitcaptures.Inparticular,wefind that anoverwhelmingmajority ofworkshave recordedand modeledthe conditionof an individual as a set of discrete observations. Although such an approach allows for data to be easily consumed by traditional machine learning approaches, formalizing the presence of each entity recorded as a feature, such a representation is incomplete. It is clear observations such as a diagnosis or procedure must occur at a single point in time, however, it would be naive to believe that such elements of health occur in isolation. Rather, there exist temporal relations connecting them, representing the variablenatureofanindividual’shealth.Theserelationscannotbedescribedby one feature or a single value, but require longitudinal observations with a series of values over time [66]. However, this is a nontrivial task from both a computational and clinical standpoint. Taking the example of a patients diagnosis history, the computational complexity of tracking the progression of multiple concurrent diagnoses canquicklybecomeintractableoneventhelargestofsystems,whilefromaclinical standpoint, many diagnoses have no direct progression, where others may split amongst a broad set of co-morbid diagnoses. 6.2 Alternative Representations Building on the notion that continued improvement of machine learning approaches to problems in the healthcare domain may require a shift in our data organization, such as the ability to capture temporal relations, there exists a significant effort to employ varying frameworks to represent the complexity of healthcare data. Perhaps the most well explored representationcan be found in the application of computational networks. Networks represent an established fieldofinterdisciplinaryresearchandpresentaneffectivemethodto capturethe direct relationbetween two arbitraryfeatures,be that a connectionbetween individuals themselves, links between comorbid diagnoses,or genomic-phenotypic relations [67,68]. Such a representation offers many attractive properties, such 16 Feldman et al. as the ability to alleviate sparsity by connecting only those elements associated with an instance, and the ability to representheterogeneous data. However,the analyticmethodsappliedtonetworksfocusprimarilyondescribingconnectivity, with measures such as centrality,degree,and betweenness, rather than the generative or discriminative models constructed to describe the relations between various healthcare features. Inanefforttocapturesuchrelations,tensorrepresentationshaveemerged.A tensoris amultidimensionalarrayspanning anarbitrarynumber ofdimensions, each representing a single feature or modality. Such a representation is advantageous to many areas of healthcare including the ability to capture a series of observationsovertimeorintegratedataacrossmultipleexperimentalconditions and analyze them simultaneously [69]. Although tensors are only emerging in their application to healthcare, mathematical operations known as decompositionshavedemonstratedtheirvalueindiscoveringlatentgroupsineachmodality and identify group-wise interactions [70]. 6.3 Integration with Clinicians and Clinical Workflows Despitetheimmensetechnologicaladvancementsinthecollectionandprocessing of health data, it is important to remember that no system can succeed on its own. We would be remiss in failing to highlight that the impact of machine learningin healthcarecannotbe discussedin isolation.Medicalresearchis itself anevolvingfield,andanunderstandingofthebiologicalprocessesbeingmodeled requiresamoretechnicalapproach.Trulycapturingsuchphenomenawillrequire close interdisciplinary collaborations with those individuals whose expertise lies in the exploration and discernment of healthcare. Itis perhapsmore appropriateto view the continueddevelopmentofhealthcareinformaticsas partofthe complexsystemencompassingclinicalworkflows. Inrelationtothecollectionandaggregationofdata,itisimportanttonotethat any increase in data collection poses tangle logistic concerns to those individuals involved in the care of an individual. For example, while it may be more accurate to assess an individual’s condition every minute, such granularity is often not feasible. As a result, there must be an increasing focus on developing innovative ways to utilize data collected as part of existing workflows, rather than demonstrating value with models requiring additional data elements. On the other end of the spectrum, in relation to model output, it is important to remember that regardless of the analytic approach used; a patient’s treatment ultimately remains inthe hands oftheir clinician.As such,there mustbe a concertedefforttoprovideappropriatecontexttotheresults.Designingapproaches withthecapabilitytoquantifyfactorssuchasconfidence,highlightingasystems strengths, and its weaknesses, for the individual consuming the information. 7 Conclusion and Future Outlook Complexity comes in many forms, and beyond the sheer volume of data created,the attributesofhealthcaredatapresentavastsetofheterogeneous,high- The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 17 dimensional,probabilistic,incomplete,uncertain,andnoisyattributes.However, in conjunction with machine learning methodologies, the increasing availability of data has the potential to provide novel and actionable insights to the field of healthcare. With this in mind, it is important to remember that although we may have reached a point computationally in which the manipulation of Big Data and execution of complex modeling techniques are possible, purely possessing such capability is not sufficient to ensure the realizationof informatics true potential in healthcare. The ability to address such complexities and ensure the effective consumptionofhealthcaredataintothemachinelearningpipelinereliesonmore than analytic capability: it relies on a deep understanding of the biological and clinical mechanisms through which the data has been generated. Frompreprocessing,to modeling,to the interpretationofmodeloutput, this work has presented a general discussion regarding the fundamental challenges presentedbysuchdatawithrespecttotheinformaticspipeline.However,awareness of suchan impactis only the first step.It is our hope thatothers will draw on these caveats and look to considerations in the design and implementation of new works, which blend together both technological capability and medical understanding to better serve those individuals in need. References 1. Yoo,I.,Alafaireet, P.,Marinov,M.,Pena-Hernandez,K.,Gopidi,R.,Chang,J.F., Hua, L.: Data mining in healthcare and biomedicine: a survey of the literature. Journal of medical systems 36(4) (2012) 2431–2448 2. Jensen, P.B., Jensen, L.J., Brunak, S.: Mining electronic health records: towards better research