healthcare domain, we again address how these challenges, at the modeling stage, impact machine learning algorithms. Heterogeneity From a technical perspective, one of the primary considerations in the application of machine learning methodologies to the increasingly heterogeneous healthcare data space comes with the acknowledgment that the data captured across each source may span a range of data types. Such data canrepresentcategorical/discrete(laboratorySRI values),ordinal(painscales), or continuous (medication dosages) values. However, as noted by Lewis et al., “traditionalstatisticalmethodsthatassumeGaussiandistributions,orengineering methods that assume vector or matrix input do not obviously generalize to datasets comprisedof variable-lengthstrings,vectors of realnumbers, trees and networks” [46]. Further,theheterogeneityofthedatasourcesthemselvespresentachallenge for learning algorithms. As the extent of available healthcare data continues to increase,wemustalsoconsidertheimplicationsofintegratingdisparatesources. 12 Feldman et al. There, of course, exist the practical concerns including record matching and differences in terminology andstandards between systems, where a patient may include their middle name on one form but not another or systems may record heightasmetersorfeet.However,themodelingofheterogeneousintegrateddata sources presents a number of unique concerns, including the ability to reconcile “dirty” data such as incompatible test results, changes in coded data, and the need to ensure trust between systems that share sensitive data [47]. Finally, at its core, the siloed data sources present a deeper systemic issue. The lack of a unique identifier to track an individual throughout the various components of the healthcare system often present an incomplete view of any individual’s health data [48]. While the missing data itself can present concern, the impact of this fragmentation compounds during the integration of multiple data sources. Incorrectly associating records of one patient from two hospitals, recordsbetweenaprimaryandspecialist,ormultipleinstancesofthesamerecord has serious implications to the machine learning algorithms used to analyze the data. At a basic level, this provides duplicate data that can bias the underlying distributions.Whileatahigher-level,thisremovesatrueindependence assumption, potentially biasing performance measures by splitting what appears to be unique instances amongst the train and test sets during evaluation. Dimensionality, Sparsity and Imbalance With the considerable advancement of computing systems and hardwareover the past few decades, the ability tostore,represent,andmanipulatehigh-dimensionaldatahasbecomecommonplace. However, the appropriate utilization of such data in the machine learning pipeline warrants additional consideration. In particular, the scenario often knownasthecurseofdimensionality,inwhichthenumberoffeaturesapproaches or exceeds the number of instances, presents a considerable obstacle to fundamentalmachinelearningtheory.Oneofthemostdirectimpactsresultsfromthe emergence of spurious correlation, where many uncorrelated random variables mayhavehighsamplecorrelations[49].Whilemoreindirectlysuchascenariohas been shown to breakdown asymptotic theory, preventing the unique estimation of parameters due to occurrence of singular matrices [50]. Further, the sparsity of feature values presents an additional concern to the development of generalizable models. The identification of latent interactions between features is often not complete, as combinations between all features is rarely captured. While in theory, such an issue can be alleviated with the collection of a large dataset, as feature spaces become ever-larger,the collection of sufficient data is not often feasible due to logistical and economical considerations.While manynewermachinelearningtechniqueshavelookedtosparsityas afoundationfortechniquesthataddresstheincreasingdimensionalityusingvarious greedy algorithms, little theoretical support is currently available for such techniques [51]. Finally,as notedprior,the presence ofsparsityoften leads to the traditional class imbalance problem, where the attribute of interest is possessed by only a subset of instances. The implications of such imbalance on statistical learning- The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 13 tasks have been well established in a number of prior works [52]. However it is worth noting a few examples of how the presence of imbalance can impact the modeling of data. From a logistical point of view, a few noisy instances can degrade the identification of the minority class, restricting it to fewer examples to train with. Whereas from a more theoretical presumptive the use of global performancemeasuresthat guide the learningprocessmayoptimize parameters and decision boundaries in favor of the majority class. Classification rules that predict the positive class are often highly specialized resulting in low coverage of instances acrossthe datasetand may be discardedin favorof providing more general rules [53]. 5 Evaluation “All models are wrong, some are useful” [54]. The provocative and now-famous quote by George Box eloquently provides a fundamental premise of machine learning. The understanding that models may not truly capture the complexity of a system, but rather provide an effective approximation of its observable attributes. This concept has since been defined more formally by Oreskes et al, stating “Model results may or may not be valid, depending on the quality and quantity of the input parameters and the accuracy of the auxiliary hypotheses” [55].Inactuality,whatthesesentimentcaptureis the needtoconstructamodel insucha waythatitaccuratelyrepresentsthe system(validation)andaccounts for the technical correctness of the model itself (verification) [8]. 5.1 Manifestation in Healthcare Together,validationandverificationrepresentacriticalaspectofcomputational toolssuchasmachinelearningsimpactonoursociety.However,accurateassessment of either measure proves a nontrivial task in its own right. Difficulties associated with validation and verification are grounded by two district ideas whichgovernbothmeasures.First,thatthereexistsa groundtruth,andsecond that any ground truth provided is correct. While both of these assumptions are difficult to guarantee for any real-world data, they are particularly relevant to the variability of data across the healthcare domain. The first concern represents a variant of