occur as a result of changing regulations, or even revisions within the standard [40]. Presentingsimilarobstaclesaswithmultiple codingstandards,thesechanges,more formally defined by the notion of concept drift, cause models built on old data to become inconsistent with new data as the models inputs and target variable change over time [11]. While such a shift is extremely difficult to identify, it is critically important, as such discrepancies make it not only difficult to understand values, but have the potential to add ambiguity during its processing [41]. In particular,changes in the code frequencies, which are often used during preprocessing and data exploration, may be attributed to other clinical attributes, rather than the true shift in language. For example, an individual with a chronic illness may have a record with multiple representations due to changes in how the illness was labeled over time. When such changes go unaccounted for, the record may be perceived as having three distinct illnesses instead of one. 4 Modeling To this point we have discussed intrinsic characteristics of data, those properties which influence the statisticalfoundations guiding machine learning theory. However,wenowlookfurther,nottothepropertiesofthedata,buttothemechanisms through which the data is consumed and represented to build effective 10 Feldman et al. machine learning models. Such attributes range from high-level aspects of integrating heterogenous data types, to low-level considerations when representing an increasingly expansive feature space. 4.1 Manifestation in Healthcare As before, we will begin with an outline of the processes within the healthcare domainfrom which suchconsiderationsarise.An overviewof eachcan be found in the respective sections to follow. Heterogeneity Drawnfrommultiplesourcesandencompassingmultiplemodalities, healthcare data represents a remarkably heterogeneous set of data types and sources. Perhaps the most prominent examples can be found within the wealth of clinical data now digitalized as a result of EMR integration across healthcare practices. Typically,such data is brokeninto structured data including diagnosis codes, procedural information, medication data, laboratory test results, data recorded directly from patient’s bedside monitors, and unstructured data such as images and clinical text [42]. However,data can also include patient demographics, financial claims, and more recently, genomic sequencing andotheromicsdata,eachofwhichmayrequiredifferentconsiderationsasthey are processed during modeling. Althoughelectronichealthrecordsareperhapsthemostwell-knownsourceof data,health-relateddatacanbecollected,inferred,andanalyzedfromanumber of indirect sources. These can include common population health and reporting fieldssuchasthecensusbureauandthedepartmentoflaborstatistics,aswellas less obvioussourcessuch as the locationof freshfood sourcesin a city. It is also worthnotingthenumberofexternaldataisonlyexpectedtoincrease,asshiftsin theregulatorylandscapeofthehealthcareindustryhaveadvancedthecollection and analysis of population health data though a number of initiatives [43]. Finally,itis importantto notethatheterogeneitycanexistevenwithindata of the same type. As an example, through prior work our group has established fundamental differences between clinical notes based on the clinical occupation ofthosewhowritethem[44].Whileimportantfortheprocessingofclinicaltext, theestablishmentofsuchheterogeneityimpressesadeeperneedforanawareness of not only the types of data we process, but the varied sources of data from which models are constructed. Dimensionality, Sparsity and Imbalance Beyond the variety of sources generating data, the digitalization of healthcare data has resulted in a significant increase in the number of features able to be extracted with respect to an instance, i.e. its dimentionality. Although the high-dimensional data resulting from the processing of unstructured images and text has become commonplace, advancements in clinical and computational technology now allow for improved analysis of biological processes at their most basic level. As an example, resultingfromthe increasingaffordabilityofgenomicsequencing,wehavewitnesseda The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 11 rise of genome-wide associationstudies, which aim to represent and identify associationsbetweentheover10millioncommonsingle-nucleotidepolymorphisms (SNPs) in the human genome [45]. However,suchexpansivefeaturesetsarenotonlyaresultofbiologicalmechanisms, but of artificial constructs used to structure the data itself. In particular, we look to the coding standards used to represent attributes of a patient’s condition and care. As noted prior, there exist a multitude of standards, each potentially representing tens of thousands of unique codes. In fact, it is the expansiveness of the resulting feature space that leads us to the next aspect of healthcare data that has been shown to impact modeling: sparsity.Althoughwemaybeabletocapture,code,andquantifyanincreasingly largefeatureset,onlyasmallsubsetoffeaturesareoftenrecordedorrelevantfor aparticularindividual.Suchapointcanbebestillustratedwiththeunderstanding thatitis highly improbablea patientwillrecordmorethanafractionofthe over 100,000 diagnoses and procedures that can now be discretely represented through the ICD-10 standard [25]. Finally, taking the considerations of dimensionality and sparsity to the next logical step, we find the concept of imbalance. Building on the notion that for anysingleinstance,thedatacapturedlikelyrepresentsonlyasparsesetofvalues withrespecttothepossiblesetofdataelements,wemustacknowledgethatthese samefeaturesareoftenusedasthe responsevariableformanymachinelearning applications. Whether the prediction of a future diagnosis, or the readmission probability of patient, effective utilization of data in which only a minority of individuals presentthe attribute ofinterestoftenrequiresadditionalprocessing, or specialized models. 4.2 Implications to Machine Learning Havingillustratedanumberofprocessesfromwhichdatachallengesarisewithin the healthcare domain, we again address how these challenges, at the modeling stage, impact machine learning algorithms. Heterogeneity From a technical perspective, one of the primary considerations in the application of machine learning methodologies to the increasingly heterogeneous healthcare data space comes with the acknowledgment that the data captured across each source may span a range of data types. Such data canrepresentcategorical/discrete(laboratorySRI values),ordinal(painscales), or continuous (medication dosages) values. However, as noted by Lewis et al., “traditionalstatisticalmethodsthatassumeGaussiandistributions,orengineering methods that assume vector or matrix input do not obviously generalize to datasets comprisedof variable-lengthstrings,vectors of realnumbers, trees and networks” [46]. Further,theheterogeneityofthedatasourcesthemselvespresentachallenge for learning algorithms.