to guide diagnoses. Medical knowledge from the guidelines can be leveraged by machine learning models to improve prediction accuracy. To achieve it, keywords and phrases were extracted from unstructured guidelines to generate TF-IDF feature vectors (Ramos et al. (2003)). These features were fed into the fully connected layer of Text-CNN, as additional inputs. We refer to this modified model as Text-TF-IDF-CNN. The detailed network structure is shown in Figure 2. 4 Note-based Classification Multimodal Machine Learning for Automated ICD Coding TF-IDFfeatures She was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus and severe hypertension Non-staticword Convolutionallayerwith ReLUactivation Fullyconnectedlayer embeddingmatrix multiplefilterwidthsand andmaxpooling withdropoutand featuremaps softmaxoutput Figure2: A modifiedText-CNNwhich usesclinicalPneotuteusmasCionnpfuidtse.nTtiahle modelthat utilizes 7 TF-IDF features is denoted as Text-TF-IDF-CNN. Training samples for 32 ICD code classes are not evenly distributed —– some classes have many samples while others have few. Such data imbalance issue often significantly compromises the performance of machine learning models. To address it, we applied Label Smoothing Regularization (LSR) (Szegedy et al. (2015)). LSR prevents our classifier from being too certain about labels during training and thus avoids overfitting. The LSR approach is able to improve the generalization of our model. More specifically, as defined in (1), I ∈ {0,1} and the average cross-entropy loss is minimized when P = I . LSR ij ij ij was implemented by replacing the truth label I with the linear combination between the ij ground truth label I and a sample drawn from a prior distribution u(j), with weights ij 1−(cid:15) and (cid:15). Here prior distribution is defined as u(j) = 1/C. We sampled (cid:15) from a beta distribution in each iteration during training, where (cid:15) ∼ Beta(α,α) and α ∈ (0,∞) is the hyperparameter for Beta distribution. As a result, the smoothed label of class j for sample i is described as, 1 I(cid:101)ij = (1−(cid:15))·I ij +(cid:15)· (2) C The average cross-entropy (CE) loss is adjusted in Equation (1) by replacing I with the ij smoothed label I(cid:101)ij , to train our Text-CNN or Text-TF-IDF-CNN model. 3.3. Ranking Based on Semi-structured Text Medical coders review the diagnosis descriptions taken by physicians in the form of textual phrases and sentences in the clinical notes or admissions table, then manually assign appropriate ICD codes by following the coding guidelines (O’malley et al. (2005)) for billing purposes. For example, the description “Acute on Chronic Kidney Failure” is a strong signal for the ICD code N17.9 “Acute Kidney Failure, unspecified” because they share a close semantic similarity. We wanted to model this process and formulated this task as Diagnosis-based Ranking (DR) problem where latent representations of all the code descriptions are computed as points in a low-dimensional dense vector space. During inference, diagnosis descriptions 5 Multimodal Machine Learning for Automated ICD Coding are mapped to the same vector space and ICD codes are ranked based on their distance from the diagnosis vector. A neural network model that considers both the character- and word-level features was trained to represent the diagnoses and ICD code descriptions in the same space. To train the model, a triplet loss function is minimized (Cheng et al. (2016)). It takes a triplet as input: diagnosis example (xa), positive code description example xp and negative code description example xn, respectively. The triplet loss defines a relative similarity between instances, by minimizing the distance between the positive pairs and maximizing the distance between the negative ones, defined as: N L = 1 (cid:104)(cid:88) max{d(xa,xp)−d(xa,xn)+α,0} (cid:105) , (3) triplet N i i i i i=1 where d(·) is the Euclidean distance d(x,y) = (cid:107)x−y(cid:107) for x,y ∈ Rd and α is the margin. 2 Here we took margin α as 1. The associated network structure is shown in Figure ??. Pre-trainedwordembeddingandCharacter-levelConvolutionNeuralNetwork(Char-CNN) (Zhang et al. (2015)) are used to represent each word token. The Char-CNN layer creates representations such that tokens with a similar form like “injection” and “injections” are mapped closer to each other. Similarly, the word embeddings represent a semantic space, such that a token “Hypertension” and its abbreviation “HTN” map closer to each other. The word embedding matrix was pre-trained on PubMed2 (Mikolov et al. (2013b)), which contains abstracts of over 550,000 biomedical papers. Then, a bidirectional LSTM (Huang et al. (2015)) layer encodes the sequential context information followed by a max-pooling layer to compute final representations. The MIMIC-III dataset does not have a one-to-one mapping of ICD code and diagnosis. To construct the triplets for training, we crawled ICD-10 codes and synonyms for their corresponding code description from online resources3. Then, we mapped all the synonyms for each ICD code as positive examples. To create high-quality negative examples, instead of randomly sampling, we computed the edit distance to extract n-grams that are similar to the code description. During inference, min-max normalization transformed the distance value to a range [0, 1]. If one admission has