sequential context information followed by a max-pooling layer to compute final representations. The MIMIC-III dataset does not have a one-to-one mapping of ICD code and diagnosis. To construct the triplets for training, we crawled ICD-10 codes and synonyms for their corresponding code description from online resources3. Then, we mapped all the synonyms for each ICD code as positive examples. To create high-quality negative examples, instead of randomly sampling, we computed the edit distance to extract n-grams that are similar to the code description. During inference, min-max normalization transformed the distance value to a range [0, 1]. If one admission has multiple diagnoses, the mean of features was computed to combine those normalized results. 3.4. Classification based on Tabular Data Tabulardatamainlyincludesfourtables, includingLABEVENTS,PRESCRIPTIONS,MICROBIOLOGYEVENTS, and CHARTEVENTS. • LABEVENTS(LAB):Itusesabinaryvaluetoindicatewhethereachlaboratoryvalue is abnormal. Furthermore, if a patient has multiple records of the same lab test, a majorityvotestrategywasadopted. Missingvalueswereconsideredasnormal. Inour experiments, a total of 753 lab tests were used to construct features for classification. • CHARTEVENTS: Based on physicians’ suggestion, we mainly focused on three measurements: Body Mass Index (BMI), heart rate, and blood pressure. A binary vector 2. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/ 3. https://www.icd10data.com/ 6 Multimodal Machine Learning for Automated ICD Coding was used to denote whether a specific measurement result is within the normal range. We combined features from this table with LABEVENTS. • PRESCRIPTIONS (MED): A binary vector was used to denote whether a medication is prescribed. Missing medications were considered as not being prescribed. Medications with a frequency of less than 50 were removed to reduce noise. A total of 1135 medications were used to construct binary features. • MICROBIOLOGYEVENTS(BIO):Abinaryfeaturewasusedtorepresentmicrobiologyeven—whetheranorganismtestispositiveornegative. Atotalof363organisms were used to form feature vectors. Our solution applied a decision tree (Quinlan (1986)) as the classifier using binary features and leveraged a one-versus-all strategy (Rifkin and Klautau (2004)) for multilabel classification. Higher weights were given to samples from minority classes to handle data imbalance. 3.5. Model Ensemble During testing, our solution takes an ensemble of the trained models for predicting ICD codes. Specifically, for each class j, the final predicted probability P is a weighted sum of j probabilities predicted by individual models: K (cid:88) (k) P = α P , (4) j k j k=1 (k) where P is the probability predicted by model k on class j, and K is the total number j of models. The weight parameters {α }K were tuned by performing a grid search on the k k=1 validation set. However, not every single patient visit is guaranteed to have all the data resources available. Hence in order to ensure all weights sum up to one, i.e., (cid:80)K α = 1, k=1 k if the k-th predictor is missing, its weight α will be given to the Text-CNN or Text-TFk IDF-CNN model. 3.6. Methods for Interpretation Two separate methods were adopted to extract the important textual and tabular features that have the highest influence on the final ICD code predictions. 3.6.1. Text Interpretability After our model predicts a specific ICD code y ∈ {1,2,...,C}, it is desirable to identify key phrases that lead to such a prediction from the textual input. To capture the association between a word w and an ICD code y, we extracted all the paths connecting w and y from the trained neural network. For each path, we computed the influence score by multiplying the values of all hidden units and the weights associated with all edges along this path. The scores of all paths were added up to measure the association strength between w and y. Consecutive words with non-zero scores were combined into phrases and then ranked by the maximum score. Top-ranked phrases were considered important signals for models to determine a specific ICD code. 7 Multimodal Machine Learning for Automated ICD Coding 3.6.2. Table Interpretability The nature of structured tabular features makes the method inherently different from those using text data. Therefore, the Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanation (LIME) method (Ribeiro et al. (2016)) was adopted to tackle this problem. LIME computes a score for each feature of an instance that represents the importance of this feature in contributing tothemodel’sfinalprediction. Insteadofgoingthroughthetrainedmodel,LIMElearnsthe weights of features by approximating the decision boundary locally (i.e. instance-specific) based on a simple model. 4. Experiments In this section, we will introduce experiments for validating our approach and evaluation results for both classification and interpretability. 4.1. Experimental Settings Thedatawasrandomlysplitintotraining,validation,andtestsetscontaining31,155,4,484, and 9,020 admissions respectively. Admissions of the same patient were categorized into the same set. This prevents the model from memorizing information of a patient from the training set and leveraging that information to inflate performance on the test set. 4.2. Hyperparameters Hyperparametersweretunedonthevalidationsetandthenappliedtothetestset,including: (1) For the Text-CNN and Text-TF-IDF-CNN model, kernel sizes of 2, 3, 4 were adopted and each kernel had 128 feature maps. Word embedding dimension was 256. Dropout rate was 0.1. L2-regularization coefficient was 10−4. Adam optimizer