Shi et al. (2017) used a neural architecture with Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and an attention mechanism that takes diagnostic descriptions as input to predict ICD codes. Similarly, Xie and Xing (2018) further explored tree-of-sequencesLSTMencodingandadversariallearningtoimprovethepredictionresults. 2 Multimodal Machine Learning for Automated ICD Coding Inquiry TEXT MIMIC III NOTEEVENTS Unstructured Free Text Text-CNN Ensemble DISCHARGE SUMMARY ICD Prediction ECG REPORT RADIOLOGY REPORT Semi-structured Char-CNN + Bidirectional NURSING NOTES Diagnosis Descriptions LSTM TABULAR ADMISSION LABEVENTS Structured Tubular Data MICROBIOLOGY Decision Tree EVENTS CHARTEVENTS PRESCRIPTIONS Retrieval Interpretations Figure 1: Model architecture for ICD code prediction based on multimodal data, where each prediction is interpreted using retrieval-based methods. 3. Methods In this section, we will introduce our approach for predicting ICD-10 codes for a patient visit, as well as for identifying the evidence to make our predictions explainable. We developed an ensemble-based approach as shown in Figure 1, which integrates modality-specific models. For unstructured text, we applied the Text Convolutional Neural Network(Text-CNN)model(Kim(2014))formulti-labelclassification. Forsemi-structured text data, we constructed a deep learning model to analyze semantic similarities between diagnoses written by physicians and ICD code descriptions. For tabular data, our approach transformed numeric features into binary features and fed them to a decision tree (Quinlan (1986)) to classify the ICD codes. During testing, our model ensembled the three aforementioned models on different modalities for improving prediction accuracy (Dietterich (2000)). To make our predictions explainable, key evidence was retrieved from raw data and presented for examination. 3.1. Data Structure Description The dataset used for this study is MIMIC-III (Johnson et al. (2016)), which contains approximately58,000hospitaladmissionsof47,000patientswhostayedintheICUoftheBeth Israel Deaconess Medical Center between 2001 and 2012. The original diagnostic codes are ICD-9codes. WemappedthemtoICD-10codes,astheyaremorewidelyadoptedintoday’s clinical practices. ICD-9 codes with multiple corresponding ICD-10 codes are removed to avoidambiguity. Basedonclinicalmeaningfulness, 32ICDcodesthataretop50frequentin both MIMIC-III and a national hospital in the U.S. were selected (see details in Table 3 in Appendix). Patient admissions that have ground truth labels of these 32 codes and at least one discharge summary were selected. In total we got 44,659 admissions, covering about 77% of the whole dataset. Six major tables from the MIMIC-III dataset were selected: 3 Multimodal Machine Learning for Automated ICD Coding • ADMISSIONS contains all information regarding a patient admission, including a preliminary diagnosis. • LABEVENTS contains all laboratory measurements. • PRESCRIPTIONS contains medications related to order entries. • MICROBIOLOGYEVENTS contains microbiology information such as whether an organism tested negative or positive in the culture. • CHARTEVENTS contains all charted data including patients’ routine vital signs and other information related to their health. • NOTEEVENTS contains all notes including nursing and physician notes, echocardiography reports, and discharge summaries. 3.2. Classification Based on Unstructured Text In this section, we will discuss how our model predicts diagnostic codes based on unstructuredtextfromNOTEEVENTS.Ourapproachincludestwosteps: datapre-processingand deep learning-based classification. The pre-processing step aims to provide a clean and standardized input for the deep learning model. It applied a standardized pipeline including tokenization and word normalization. Tokens with a frequency of less than ten were removed. At test time, out-ofvocabulary words were considered to be a special token “UNK”. The processed text was fed into a multi-label classification model for ICD code prediction. We denote the ICD code set as Y = {1,2,...,C}. Given a text input X which is a sequence of tokens, our goal is to select a subset of codes Y ⊆ Y that is most relevant to X. A Text-CNN model (Kim (2014)) was applied to achieve this. This model represents tokens in X using word embeddings (Mikolov et al. (2013a,b)), and applies a convolution layerontopoftheembeddingstocapturethetemporalcorrelationsamongadjacenttokens. To learn the Text-CNN model, the objective is to minimize the average cross-entropy (CE) loss (Shore and Johnson (1980)) for each ICD code class, defined as, (cid:34) N C (cid:35) 1 (cid:88)(cid:88) (cid:0) (cid:1) L = − I logP +(1−I )log 1−P , (1) CE ij ij ij ij NC i=1 j=1 where N and C are the number of training examples (patients’ admissions) and unique ICD code. I is a binary label representing whether example i is assigned with code j and P ij ij is the probability (predicted by Text-CNN) indicating the likelihood that code j is relevant to example i. In practice, clinical guidelines developed by human experts are used to guide diagnoses. Medical knowledge from the guidelines can be leveraged by machine learning models to improve prediction accuracy. To achieve it, keywords and phrases were extracted from unstructured guidelines to generate TF-IDF feature vectors (Ramos et al. (2003)). These features were fed into the fully connected layer of Text-CNN, as additional inputs. We refer to this modified model as Text-TF-IDF-CNN. The detailed network structure is shown in Figure 2. 4 Note-based Classification Multimodal Machine Learning for Automated ICD Coding TF-IDFfeatures She was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus and severe hypertension Non-staticword Convolutionallayerwith ReLUactivation Fullyconnectedlayer embeddingmatrix multiplefilterwidthsand andmaxpooling withdropoutand featuremaps softmaxoutput