ProceedingsofMachineLearningResearch106:1–17,2019 MachineLearningforHealthcare Multimodal Machine Learning for Automated ICD Coding Keyang Xu♠ xky0714@gmail.com Mike Lam, Jingzhi Pang, Xin Gao, Charlotte Band♠ Piyush Mathur, Frank Papay, Ashish K. Khanna, Jacek B. Cywinski, Kamal Maheshwari(cid:52) Pengtao Xie♠ pengtao.xie@petuum.com Eric P. Xing♠ eric.xing@petuum.com ♠Petuum Inc, Pittsburgh, PA, USA (cid:52)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio USA Abstract ThisstudypresentsamultimodalmachinelearningmodeltopredictICD-10diagnostic codes. Wedevelopedseparatemachinelearningmodelsthatcanhandledatafromdifferent modalities, including unstructured text, semi-structured text and structured tabular data. We further employed an ensemble method to integrate all modality-specific models to generate ICD codes. Key evidence was also extracted to make our prediction more convincing and explainable. We used the Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care III (MIMIC-III) dataset to validate our approach. For ICD code prediction, our best-performing model (micro-F1 = 0.7633,micro-AUC=0.9541)significantlyoutperformsotherbaselinemodelsincludingTFIDF(micro-F1=0.6721, micro-AUC=0.7879)andText-CNNmodel(micro-F1=0.6569, micro-AUC = 0.9235). For interpretability, our approach achieves a Jaccard Similarity Coefficient (JSC) of 0.1806 on text data and 0.3105 on tabular data, where well-trained physicians achieve 0.2780 and 0.5002 respectively. 1. Introduction Clinical Relevance The International Classification of Diseases (ICD), endorsed by the World Health Organization (WHO), is a medical classification list of codes for diagnoses and procedures1. ICD codes have been adopted widely by physicians and other health care providers for reimbursement, storage, and retrieval of diagnostic information (Nadathur (2010), Bottle and Aylin (2008)). The process of assigning ICD codes to a patient visit is time-consuming and error-prone. Clinical coders need to extract key information from Electronic Medical Records (EMRs) and assign correct codes based on category, anatomic site, laterality, severity, and etiology (Quan et al. (2005)). The amount of information and complex hierarchy greatly increase the difficulty. Coding errors can further cause billing mistakes, claim denials, and underpayment (Adams et al. (2002)). Therefore, an automatic and robust ICD coding process is in great demand. EMRsstoredataindifferentmodalities,suchasunstructuredtext,semi-structuredtext, and structured tabular data (Bates et al. (2003)). Unstructured text data includes notes 1. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/icd/icd10cm.htm ©2019K.Xuet al. 2202 peS 1 ]GL.sc[ 4v84331.0181:viXra Multimodal Machine Learning for Automated ICD Coding takenbyphysicians,nursingnotes,labreports,testreports,anddischargesummaries. Semistructured text data refers to a list of structured phrases and unstructured sentences that describe diagnoses written by physicians. Structured tabular data contains prescriptions and clinical measurements such as vital signs, lab test results, and microbiology test results (Lee and Muis, Lipton et al. (2015), Parthiban and Srivatsa (2012)). How to leverage all information from large-volume EMR data is a non-trivial task. Besides, in clinical practice, providing predictions with black-box machine learning models is not convincing for physicians and insurance companies. How to provide evidence related to predicted ICD codes is also an important task. Technical Significance In this work, we developed an ensemble-based approach that integrates three modality-specific models to fully exploit complementary information from multiple data sources and boost the predictive accuracy of ICD codes. We also explored methods to produce interpretable and explainable predictions. The primary contribution of this study is twofold: • We applied NLP and multimodal machine learning to predict ICD diagnostic codes, achieving state-of-the-art accuracy. The complementary nature of multimodal data makesourmodelmorerobustandaccurate. Inaddition, weeffectivelyaddresseddata imbalance issues, which is a very general problem for ICD code prediction. • We proposed approaches to interpret predictions for unstructured text and structured tables, which make our prediction more explainable and convincing to physicians. 2. Related Work Many researchers have explored the topic of automatic ICD coding using text data in recent years (Stanfill et al. (2010)). lar (1996) considered it as a single-label classification on patient discharge summaries with multiple classifiers. Kavuluru et al. (2015) treated it as a multi-label classification problem (Tsoumakas and Katakis (2007)), and developed ranking approaches after text feature engineering and selection using EMR data. Koopman et al. (2015) developed a classification system combining Support Vector Machine (SVM) and rule-based methods to identify four high-impact diseases with patient death certificates. It is also common to see unsupervised and semi-supervised strategies applied in predicting ICD codes. Scheurwegs et al. (2017) proposed an unsupervised medical concept extraction approach using an unlabeled corpus to frame clinical text into a list of concepts, which helps with ICD code prediction. Deep learning models are also widely used (Shickel et al. (2018)). Duarte et al. (2018) developed a recurrent neural model and Mullenbach et al. (2018) adopted a CNN-based model with a per-label attention mechanism to assign ICD codes based on the free-text description. Shi et al. (2017) used a neural architecture with Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and an attention mechanism that takes diagnostic descriptions as input to predict ICD codes. Similarly, Xie and Xing (2018) further explored tree-of-sequencesLSTMencodingandadversariallearningtoimprovethepredictionresults. 2 Multimodal Machine Learning for Automated ICD Coding Inquiry TEXT MIMIC III NOTEEVENTS Unstructured Free Text Text-CNN Ensemble DISCHARGE SUMMARY ICD Prediction ECG REPORT RADIOLOGY REPORT Semi-structured Char-CNN + Bidirectional NURSING NOTES Diagnosis Descriptions LSTM TABULAR ADMISSION LABEVENTS Structured Tubular Data MICROBIOLOGY Decision Tree EVENTS CHARTEVENTS PRESCRIPTIONS Retrieval Interpretations Figure 1: Model architecture for ICD code prediction based on multimodal data, where each prediction is