3.3. Straight-Through Gumbel-Softmax Estimator (ST) Continuous relaxations of one-hot vectors still have no sparsity (although all components except one are close to 0). To sample one-hot vector, Jang et al. (2016) proposed to discretize y by taking z = one-hot(argmax(y)), and use continuous approximation in the backward pass by taking ∇ y ≈ ∇ z. Thus, gradients become biased. Nevertheless, the θ θ biasapproacheszeroasthetemperaturetendstozero. ThistechniquewascalledaStraightThrough (ST) Gumbel Estimator. 3.4. Hybrid Reinforcement Learning After training the controller with sparse policy π (i.e. only one computational unit with non-zero score on each iteration), we propose to apply Hybrid Reinforcement Learning, introduced in Wang et al. (2018), to reduce number of CU’s evaluations. For this, we add a separateCUthatalwaysreturnszero. Combiningwithresidualconnection, selectionofthis unit will produce an identity mapping. To promote usage of this unit, we add a regularizer: t minR (θ,π) = E (cid:88) Rskipyskip, (9) HybRL y k k θ,π k=1 wheretisthetotalnumberofcontroller’sinvocations, k isthecurrentone, Rskip isareward k for skipping the computation of a CU, i.e. using a zero unit. Rskip can depend on k or be k a constant. yskip is an indicator of whether computation was skipped or not. Maximizing k this reward promotes the network to omit evaluation of CU, reducing the number of total operations. 4. ReSet Inthissection,wedescribethefullarchitectureofdynamicalroutingthatwecallaRecurrent Set (ReSet) module. The model consists of a Controller and a pool (set) of Computational Units (CUs). For each object, the controller assigns scores to computational units and evaluates each block withanon-zeroweight. Aweightedsumoftheresultsisaddedtotheoriginalrepresentation, as described in Eq. 3. We repeat this operation a fixed number of times, and then pass the result to next layer. ReSet module performs case-specific transformations of input objects, clustering their internal representations and passing them through different sets of computational units. MotivatedwithResNet’srobustnesstodeletionandshuffleoflayers, theproposedrecurrent structure has similarities with iterative refinement Greff et al. (2016). The proposed model may include multiple evaluations of the same computational unit, giving more flexibility than iterative refinement. The model with a soft selection is evaluated as follows: [π ,h ] = C(x ,h ), (10) k k+1 k k y = Softmax(π ), (11) k k n (cid:88) x = x + y F (x ). (12) k+1 k ki i k i=1 6 ReSet: Recurrent Dynamic Routing in ResNets Recurrent iterations 1..k Controller y CU 1 𝑥 "#$..& CU 2 … … … … 𝑥 𝑥 " "#&#$ CU n Pool of CU-s Zero Skip-connection Figure 1: ReSet module. Input x is processed for k iterations. At each iteration, either i a zero function, or one of n Computational Units (CU) is selected using a controller. The selected unit is evaluated with a value x , and the result is added to the current value of i+j x , obtaining x . The final output of the model is x i+j i+j+1 i+k+1 gniloop .gvA FC + softmax 3x3 vnoC 3x3 vnoC (a) CNN controller gniloop .xaM LSTM cell FC + softmax (b) RNN controller Figure2: Controllerarchitectures. a)Convolutionalcontroller. Aninputtothiscontrolleris acurrentfeaturerepresentationx . b)Recurrentcontroller. Alongwithx , anintermediate i i LSTM layer stores the hidden state between representations. We also add an entropy regularizer with of two terms: promoting different routes for different objects (high entropy across cases) and and promoting deterministic routes for each object on its own (low entropy for each case): t t (cid:88) (cid:88) minR (θ,y) = −λ HE y +λ E Hy , (13) ent 1 θ i 2 θ i θ i=1 i=1 where θ are model parameters, and H is entropy. We tried two different architectures for a controller: a convolutional (CNN, Figure 2a) and a recurrent (RNN, Figure 2b) controller. The CNN controller is a shallow convolutional network without biases with a global average pooling and a fully-connected layer with a Softmax in the end. As recommended in Jastrzebski et al. (2017), we store and recompute unique batch normalization statistics and parameters for each iteration. RNN controller, uses an LSTM cell Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997) to perform sequential decision making within one ReSet module. The diagram of a ReSet module is shown on Figure 1. 7 Kemaev Polykovskiy Vetrov 3x3 .vnoC .snwoD ReSet 1 ReSet 2 .snwoD 𝑘 " 𝑘 # 𝑘 $ ReSet3 FC + softmax Figure 3: General scheme of ResNet with dynamic recurrent routing. Three stages of ReSet with intermediate downsampling layers and a final fully-connected layers with a Softmax. Further,wedesignedaReSetarchitecture(Figure3),thatisobtainedbyreplacingstages inResNet-38withReSetmodules,allowingdynamicroutingthroughasetofComputational Units presented by ResNet blocks. The model consists of 3 sequential parts: 1. A preliminary block containing a convolutional layer, followed by a batch normalization, ReLU, and a max pooling. 2. Three ReSet modules with a similar structure. Each module contains a pool of five Computational Units {F ,...,F } and a zero-connection. Each CU is structured 1 5 as original ResNet’s block, i.e. small learnable network formed by two convolutional layerswithbatchnormalizationsandReLUactivations. WeiterateeachReSetmodule five times with these CUs to produce the output.