that can lead to the better quality of classification and a lower number of required operations with a slightly greater number of parameters. While we examined only a part of these insights, we hope that this experience will be useful for the scientific community and will help researchers to further deepen their understanding of ResNet-based models properties. As our main contribution, we proposed the ReSet block that is indeed more flexible than SkipNet (Wang, 2017). However, SkipNet and ReSet have different motivations and outcomes—SkipNet’s controller implicitly groups objects by complexity, while our model groups objects by their semantic similarity. For example, one can use routing scores as a short set of discrete image features (or embeddings). Also, SkipNet can only skip layers and cannot add new transformations, while ReSet can learn new features by combining learned layers and increase the quality. In our work, we described different approaches to ReSet’s construction and provided many experiments with different settings. We believe that this 2 ReSet: Recurrent Dynamic Routing in ResNets experience will be useful for future research on ResNets and neural networks with dynamic routing. In this paper, we denote our contributions as follows: • Weproposea ReSet blockthat dynamically selects andapplies transformations to the input data from a set of learnable layers (computational units). • We design neural network ReSet-38 incorporating ReSet module into ResNet-38, and obtainbetterresultsonbenchmarkswhilesavingthesamenumberofnet’sparameters • We observed that proposed ReSet module groups objects in certain paths patterns by their semantic similarity (not only by complexity, as in described above models), which opens a wide range of possible applications of obtained path vectors (e.g. using them as image embeddings) 2. Related Work Various recent studies on ResNets revealed many intriguing properties of neural networks equipped with skip connections. InitiallyproposedResNetisorganizedasthreegroupsoflayerscalledstages. Eachstage isasequenceofafewblocksoflayerswithaskipconnection. Betweenthestages, anetwork downsamples the image to reduce its spatial dimensions. InadditiontoVeitetal.(2016)andSrivastavaetal.(2015),authorsofGreffetal.(2016) proposed another explanation of ResNets’ robustness to deletion and reordering. Authors provided experiments showing that ResNet does not learn completely new representations within one stage, but instead its blocks refine the features extracted by the previous layer. Only after downsampling that is performed between successive stages, a new level of representationcanbeobtained. Thisprocessiscalledunrolled iterative estimation oraniterative feature refinement Jastrzebski et al. (2017). Later, Huang et al. (2017a) summed up the similarities between the boosting and an iterative feature refinement. Consideredpropertiesofresidualnetworkswereimplicitlyexploitedbymanyresearchers in their works, resulting in great number of modifications of ResNet, which allows to significantly reduce the number of parameters and the number of operations during inference, without a decrease of performance. Initially, Graves (2016) introduced Adaptive Computation Time (ACT) mechanism for recurrent neural networks. Since some objects are easier to classify than others, this mechanism dynamically selects the number of iterations for a recurrent neural network, while promotingthesmallernumberofiterations. Next,Figurnovetal.(2017)developedthisidea further and incorporated ACT in ResNet-based architecture, where it decides whether to evaluate or to skip certain layers. They also introduced the Spacial Adaptive Computation Time (SACT) mechanism, which applies ACT to each spatial position of the residual block. Authors reported up to 45% reduction of the number of computations while preserving almost the same efficiency as original ResNets. ShaResNet Boulch (2017) shares the weights of convolutional layers between residual blocks within one stage. This model is trained exactly in the same fashion as the original ResNet and reduces the number of parameters up to 40% without a significant loss in the 3 Kemaev Polykovskiy Vetrov quality. Also, Jastrzebski et al. (2017) successfully reduced the number of weights three folds by sharing all residual blocks after the fifth within each stage. They investigated that sharing batch normalization statistics leads to low model efficiency, and resolved this issue by keeping a unique set of batch normalization statistics and parameters for each iteration. SkipNet Wang et al. (2018) dynamically routes objects through a ResNet, skipping some layers. Authors developed a Hybrid Reinforcement Learning technique to reward the network for skipping blocks that have a small impact on the output. This way, they reformulated the routing problem in the context of sequential decision making, reducing the total number of computations on average by 40%. This work is similar to ours in the idea of dynamically selecting computational units. However, SkipNet can neither change the order of blocks nor select a single block more than once. Finally, Leroux et al. (2018) used ideas of iterative estimation, adaptive computational time and weights sharing and proposed an Iterative and Adaptive Mobile Neural Network. The model is a compact network that consists of recursive blocks with ACT, and reduces boththesizeandacomputationalcostcomparedwithResNets. Authorsmaximallyavoided redundancy using only one block, which recursively computes transformations until ACT module decides to proceed to the next stage. 3. Learning the Routing Policy Following the work of Wang et al. (2018), we formulate the routing as a policy learning problem. We propose a model that at each iteration selects a Computational Unit (CU)