block more than once. Finally, Leroux et al. (2018) used ideas of iterative estimation, adaptive computational time and weights sharing and proposed an Iterative and Adaptive Mobile Neural Network. The model is a compact network that consists of recursive blocks with ACT, and reduces boththesizeandacomputationalcostcomparedwithResNets. Authorsmaximallyavoided redundancy using only one block, which recursively computes transformations until ACT module decides to proceed to the next stage. 3. Learning the Routing Policy Following the work of Wang et al. (2018), we formulate the routing as a policy learning problem. We propose a model that at each iteration selects a Computational Unit (CU) F from a set of units F = {F ,...,F } and applies it to the data by computing i 1 n k x = x +F (x ). (1) k+1 k i k k The routing policy selects a Computational Unit by calculating a distribution vector y ∈ k Rn that assigns a probability value for the selection of each Computational Unit. Each dimension corresponds to one of n available CU, where the higher value indicates the higher contribution of the corresponding unit. Then, we sample an index of a Computational Unit from the distribution y : k xhard = xhard+F (xhard), i ∼ y (2) k+1 k i k k k k Since the selection of a computational unit is a non-differentiable function, we can consider a “soft” selection mechanism, that applies the policy by computing an expected output value with respect to the distribution y : k n xsoft = xsoft+ (cid:88) y F (xsoft). (3) k+1 k kj j k j=1 Notice, that when the weight y for a Computational Unit F is zero, evaluation of F (x ) kj j j i can be skipped, saving computational time. With a slight abuse of notation, we further denote xsoft and xhard as x , and the type of selection mechanism that is used will be clear k k k from the context. 4 ReSet: Recurrent Dynamic Routing in ResNets We compute the weights y using the Controller network C. The Controller takes a k current representation of an object x and a current state of the controller h : k k [π ,h ] = C(x ,h ), (4) k k+1 k k where π are logits that can be transformed into a probability distribution by applying a k Softmax function: exp(π ) y = ki . (5) ki (cid:80)n exp(π ) j=1 kj In the general case, the soft scoring for a dense vector y requires an evaluation of all CUs, requiring a lot of computational resources. The soft selection is differentiable, but is more computationally expensive. Hard selection is a non-differentiable operation and requires some tricks to pass the gradient through sampling using REINFORCE algorithm, Gumbel trick, or Hybrid Reinforcement Learning. 3.1. REINFORCE REINFORCE is a general-purpose algorithm for estimating gradient with respect to the policy Williams (1992), and is based on Monte-Carlo estimation of path-dependent gradients: n 1 (cid:88) ∇E L = E ∇Llogy ≈ ∇Llogyt, yt ∼ p(y) (6) y y n t=1 Its known issue is notoriously high variance of gradients, which makes its application difficult. Several approaches to reduce variance were made in Greensmith et al. (2004). However, as experiments revealed, they appeared to be not powerful enough in the context of our problem. This result can be explained by an exponentially large number of routes that can be used for an object, requiring plenty of simulations in each pooling node for precise enough gradient estimation. 3.2. Gumbel-Softmax Estimator Proposed in Jang et al. (2016), this technique performs continuous relaxation of one-hot discrete sampled vector: exp((log(π )+g )/τ) i i y = , (7) i (cid:80)n exp((log(π )+g )/τ) j=1 j j where π ...π are logits for each option, τ is a constant called a temperature, and g ...g 1 n 1 n are samples from a Gumbel(0,1) distribution, that can be easily computed as: g = −log(−log(u )), u ∼ Uniform[0,1]. (8) i i i This relaxation requires a soft selection. However, when a temperature τ tends to zero, weights of all elements but one become almost one-hot, effectively selecting only a single unit. 5 Kemaev Polykovskiy Vetrov 3.3. Straight-Through Gumbel-Softmax Estimator (ST) Continuous relaxations of one-hot vectors still have no sparsity (although all components except one are close to 0). To sample one-hot vector, Jang et al. (2016) proposed to discretize y by taking z = one-hot(argmax(y)), and use continuous approximation in the backward pass by taking ∇ y ≈ ∇ z. Thus, gradients become biased. Nevertheless, the θ θ biasapproacheszeroasthetemperaturetendstozero. ThistechniquewascalledaStraightThrough (ST) Gumbel Estimator. 3.4. Hybrid Reinforcement Learning After training the controller with sparse policy π (i.e. only one computational unit with non-zero score on each iteration), we propose to apply Hybrid Reinforcement Learning, introduced in