9102 ceD 62 ]GL.sc[ 3v62401.2181:viXra Noname manuscript No. (will be inserted by the editor) Stochastic Trust Region Inexact Newton Method for Large-scale Machine Learning Vinod Kumar Chauhan ∗ · Anuj Sharma · Kalpana Dahiya Received: date/Accepted: date Abstract Nowadays stochastic approximation methods are one of the major research direction to deal with the large-scale machine learning problems. From stochastic first order methods, now the focus is shiftingtostochasticsecondordermethodsdue totheirfasterconvergenceandavailabilityofcomputing resources. In this paper, we have proposed a novel Stochastic Trust RegiOn Inexact Newton method, calledasSTRON,tosolvelarge-scalelearningproblemswhichusesconjugategradient(CG)toinexactly solve trust region subproblem. The method uses progressive subsampling in the calculation of gradient and Hessian values to take the advantage of both, stochastic and full-batch regimes. We have extended STRON using existing variance reduction techniques to deal with the noisy gradients and using preconditioned conjugate gradient (PCG) as subproblem solver, and empirically proved that they do not work as expected, for the large-scale learning problems. Finally, our empirical results prove efficacy of the proposed method against existing methods with bench marked datasets. Keywords stochastic optimisation · subsampling · second order methods · inexact newton · large-scale learning 1 Introduction Machine learning involves data intensive optimization problems which have large number of component functions corresponding to large amount of available data. Traditional/classical methods, like Newton method, fail to perform well on such large-scale learning problems (i.e., problems with large number of data points) due to large per-iteration complexity. So nowadays one of the major challenge in machine learning is to develop scalable and efficient algorithms to deal with these large-scale learning problems [40, 11, 12]. To solve the machine learning problems, gradientdescent (GD) [10] is the classical method of choice ∗MostofthisworkwasdonewhenauthorwasdoinghisPhDatPanjabUniversityChandigarh,India. ∗This is a pre-print of an article published in International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics. The final authenticated versionisavailableonlineat:https://doi.org/10.1007/s13042-019-01055-9 VinodKumarChauhan DepartmentofEngineering UniversityofCambridge,UK E-mail:vk359@cam.ac.uk Homepage: http://www.eng.cam.ac.uk/profiles/vk359 AnujSharma ComputerScience&Applications PanjabUniversityChandigarh,INDIA E-mail:anujs@pu.ac.in Homepage: https://sites.google.com/view/anujsharma KalpanaDahiya UniversityInstituteofEngineeringandTechnology PanjabUniversityChandigarh,INDIA E-mail:kalpanas@pu.ac.in but it trains slowly while dealing with large-scale learning problems due to high per-iteration cost. Stochastic approximationbasedmethods [33] canbe quite effective in such situations but they converge slowly due to the noisy approximations of gradient. So a variety of stochastic variance reduction techniques came to existence, e.g.,[25, 17, 34, 2, 19]. But the majorlimitation ofthese methods is that they can converge up to linear rate only. Newton method is another classical method to solve optimization problems, which can give up to quadraticconvergencerate[7].Butagain(pure) Newtonmethod is notfeasible withlarge-scalelearning problems due to huge per-iteration computational complexity and need to store a huge Hessian matrix. So nowadaysone of the most significant open question in optimization for machine learning is: “Can we develop stochastic second order methods with quadratic convergence, like Newton method but has low per-iteration complexity, like stochastic approximation methods?”. After success in the stochastic first ordermethods,the researchis shifting its focus towardsthe stochasticsecondordermethods to leverage the faster convergence of second order methods and the available computing power. Inexact Newton (also called truncated Newton or Hessian free) methods and quasi-Newton methods areamongthe majorresearchdirectionsfordevelopingsecondordermethods [5].InexactNewtonmethodstrytosolvetheNewtonequationapproximatelywithoutcalculatingandstoringtheHessianmatrix. On the other hand, quasi-Newton methods try to approximate the Hessian inverse and avoid the need to store the Hessian matrix. Thus both the methods try to resolve the issues with Newton method for solving large-scalelearning problems. The stochastic variants of inexact Newton and quasi-Newton, further reduce the complexity of these methods by using subsampled gradient and Hessian calculations. In this paper,we haveproposeda novelstochastictrustregioninexactNewton(STRON)method to solve the large-scale learning problems, which introduces subsampling to gradient and Hessian calculations. It uses progressive subsampling to enjoy the benefits of both the regimes, stochastic approximationand full-batch learning. We further extend the method using existing variance reduction techniques to deal with noise produced by subsampling of gradient values, and by proposing PCG for solving the trust region subproblem. 1.1 Optimization Problem We consider unconstrained convex optimization problem of expected risk, as given below: minR(w)=E[f(w;ξ)], (1) w where f(w;ξ) = f(w;x ,y ) = f(h(w;x ),y ) is a smooth composition of linear prediction model h i i i i and loss function f over randomly selected data point (x ,y ) from the unknown distribution P (x ,y ), i i i i parameterized by the model parameter w ∈ Rn. Since it is not feasible to solve (1) as P is unknown so the model is approximatedby taking a set N ={(x1,y1),...,(x l ,y l )} of l data points from the unknown distribution P and then solving the empirical risk minimization problem, as given below: l 1 minF(w)= f(w;x ,y ). (2) i i w l i=1 X For simplicity, we take f(w;x ,y ) = f (w). Finite sum optimization problems of type (2) exists across i i i different fields, like signal processing, statistics, operation research, data science and machine learning, e.g., logistic regressionand SVM in machine learning. 1.2 Solution Techniques Simple iterative classical method to solve (2) is