these stochastic variants of first order methods the convergenceislimitedtolinearrateonly,unlikethesecondordermethodswhichcangiveuptoquadratic rate. Secondorder methods utilize the curvature informationto guide the step directiontowardsthe solution and exhibit faster convergencethan the first order methods. But huge per-iteration cost due to the huge Hessianmatrix and its inversionmake the training of models slow for large-scaleproblems. So certaintechniqueshavebeendevelopedtodealwiththeissuesrelatedtoHessianmatrix,e.g.,quasi-Newton methods and inexact Newton methods are two major directions to deal with the huge computational cost of Newton method. Quasi-Newton methods approximate the Hessian matrix during each iteration, e.g., BFGS [20] and its limited memory variant, called L-BFGS [28], are examples of the quasi-Newton class which use gradient and parameter values from the previous iterations to approximate the Hessian inverse. L-BFGS uses only recent information from previous M-iterations. On the other hand, inexact Newton methods try to solve the Newton system approximately, e.g., Newton-CG [38]. Recently,severalstochasticvariantsofBFGSandL-BFGShavebeenproposedtodealwithlarge-scale problems.Schraudolphetal.[35]proposedstochasticvariantsofBFGSandL-BFGSfortheonlinesetting, known as oBFGS. Mokhtari and Ribeiro [30] extended oBFGS by adding regularization which enforces upper bound on the eigen values of the approximate Hessian, known as RES (Regularized Stochastic BFGS). Stochastic quasi-Newton (SQN) [9] is another stochastic variant of L-BFGS which collects curvatureinformationatregularintervals,insteadofateachiteration.Variance-reducedStochasticNewton (VITE) [29] extended RES and proposed to use variance reduction for the subsampled gradient values for solving smoothly strongly convex problems. Kolte et al. [24] provided another stochastic L-BFGS method with variance reduction using SVRG (referred as SVRG-LBFGS). Moritz et al. [31] proposed Stochastic L-BFGS (SLBFGS) using SVRG for variance reduction and using Hessian-vector product to approximatethe gradientdifferences forcalculatingthe Hessianapproximations,alsoreferredas SVRGSQN. SVRG-LBFGS and SVRG-SQN differ in how the curvature is approximated (i.e. how Hessian is approximated),formercollectsthecurvatureinformationonceduringeachepoch(outeriterations)using gradient differences but later collects the curvature information after regular intervals inside the inneriterations using Hessian-vector products. Berahas et al. [4] proposed multi-batch scheme into stochastic L-BFGSwhere batchsample changes with some overlapswith previous iteration.Bollapragadaet al.[6] proposed progressivebatching, stochastic line search and stable Newton updates for L-BFGS. Bollapragada et al. [5] studies the conditions on the subsample sizes to get the different convergence rates. Stochastic inexact Newton methods are also exploredextensively. Byrd et al. [8] proposed stochastic variants of Newton-CG along with L-BFGS method. Bollapragada et al. [5] studies subsampled Newton methods and find conditions on subsample sizes and forcing term (constant used with the residual condition), for linear convergence of Newton-CG method. Bellavia et al. [3] studies the effect of forcing term and line search to find linear and super-linear convergence of Newton-CG method. Newton-SGI (stochastic gradient iteration) is another way of solving the linear system approximately and is studied in Agarwal et al. [1]. TrustRegionNewton(TRON)methodisone ofthe mostefficientsolverforsolvinglarge-scalelinear classificationproblems[27].ThisistrustregioninexactNewtonmethodwhichdoesnotuseanysubsampling and is present in LIBLINEAR library [18]. Hsia et al. [21] extends TRON by improving the trust region radius value. Hsia et al. [22], further extends TRON and uses preconditioned conjugate gradient (PCG) which uses weighted averageof identity matrix anddiagonalmatrix as a preconditioner,to solve the trust regionsubproblem.Since subsampling is an effective wayto deal with the large-scaleproblems so in this paper, we have proposed a stochastic variant of trust region inexact Newton method, which have not been studied so far to the best of our knowledge. 4 3 Trust Region Inexact Newton Method Inexact Newton methods, also called as Truncated Newton or Hessian free methods, solve the Newton equation (linear system) approximately. CG method is a commonly used technique to solve the trust regionsubproblemapproximately.Inthissection,wediscussinexactNewtonmethodanditstrustregion variation. 3.1 Inexact Newton Method The quadratic model m (p) obtained using Taylor’s theorem is given below: k 1 F(w +p)−F(w )≈m (p)≡∇F (w ) T p+ pT∇2F (w )p. (7) k k k k k 2 Taking derivative of m (p) w.r.t. p and equating to zero, we get, k ∇2F (w )p=−∇F (w ), (8) k k which is Newton system and its solution gives Newton method, as given below: wk+1 =wk+p =wk−∇2F(w ) −1 ∇F (w ). (9) k k k The computational complexity of this iteration is O(n2l+n3) which is very expensive. This iteration involves the calculation and inversion of a large Hessian matrix which is not only very expensive to calculate but expensive to store also. CG method approximately solves the subproblem (8) without forming the Hessian matrix, which solves the issues related to large computational complexity and need to store the large Hessian matrix. Each iteration runs for a given number of CG iterations or until the residual condition is satisfied, as given below: ′ kr k≤η k∇F(w )k, (10) k k k where r =∇2F(w )p+∇F (w ) and η ′ is a small positive value, known as forcing term [32]. k k k k 3.2 Trust Region Inexact Newton Method Trust region is a region in which the approximate quadratic model of the given function gives correct approximation for that function. In trust region methods, we don’t need to calculate the step size (also calledlearningrate)directlybut they indirectlyadjustthe stepsizeasper the trustregionradius.Trust region method solves the following subproblem to get the step direction p : k