so the model is approximatedby taking a set N ={(x1,y1),...,(x l ,y l )} of l data points from the unknown distribution P and then solving the empirical risk minimization problem, as given below: l 1 minF(w)= f(w;x ,y ). (2) i i w l i=1 X For simplicity, we take f(w;x ,y ) = f (w). Finite sum optimization problems of type (2) exists across i i i different fields, like signal processing, statistics, operation research, data science and machine learning, e.g., logistic regressionand SVM in machine learning. 1.2 Solution Techniques Simple iterative classical method to solve (2) is gradient descent (GD) [10], as given below: wk+1 =wk−α ∇F (w ), (3) k k where (k +1) is iteration number and α is called learning rate or step size. The complexity of this k iteration is O(nl) which is large for large-scale learning problems due to large number of data points. 2 Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [33] is very effective to deal with such problems due to its low periteration complexity, as given below: wk+1 =wk−α ∇f (w ), (4) k ik k where i is randomly selecteddata point. But convergencecan’t be guaranteedin SGD because ofnoisy k gradient values. Another classical second order method to solve (2) is Newton method, as given below: wk+1 =wk−α ∇2F (w ) −1 ∇F (w ). (5) k k k The complexity of this iteration is O(n2l +n3) and it needs to store and invert the Hessian matrix ∇2F (w ), which is computationally very expensive and needs large memory for large-scale learning k problems, respectively. That’s why first order methods and their stochastic variants have been studied very extensively, during the last decade, to solve the large-scale learning problems but not second order methods.Asstochasticfirstordermethodshavehittheirlimitsandduetogoodavailabilityofcomputing power,the mainfocus isshifting towardsstochasticsecondordermethods, andnowadaysoneimportant open question is to find stochastic second order methods with quadratic convergence rates. Therearetwomajorresearchdirectionsforsecondordermethods:quasi-Newtonmethodsandinexact Newton methods, both of which try to resolve the issues associated with the Newton method. QuasiNewton methods try to approximate the Hessian matrix during each iteration, as given below: wk+1 =wk−α B ∇F (w ), (6) k k k where B is an approximateof ∇2F (w ) −1 , e.g., Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno(BFGS) algorithm k k is one such method [20]. On the other hand, inexact Newton methods try to solve the Newton system approximately, e.g., Newton-CG [38]. Both the methods try to resolve the issues related with Newton method but still their complexities are largefor large-scaleproblems.So a number ofstochastic variants of these methods have been proposed, e.g., [8, 9, 6, 3] which introduce subsampling to gradient and Hessian calculations. 1.3 Contributions The contributions of the manuscript are listed below: – The manuscript highlights the recent shift of stochastic methods from first order to second order methods and raises an open question that we need stochastic second order methods with quadratic convergence rate to solve the large-scale machine learning problems. – WehaveproposedanovelsubsampledvariantoftrustregioninexactNewtonmethodforsolvinglargescale learning problems, which is called STRON and is the first stochastic variant of trust region inexact Newton methods. STRON uses progressive subsampling scheme for gradient and Hessian calculationsto enjoy the benefits of both stochastic and full batch regimes.STRON can convergeup to quadratic rate and answers the raised open question. – STRON has been extended using existing variance reduction techniques to deal with the noisy approximations of the gradient calculations. The extended method uses stochastic variance reduced gradient(SVRG)forvariancereductionwithstaticbatchingforgradientcalculationsandprogressive batchingfortheHessiancalculations.Theempiricalresultsprovethatthisdoesnotworkasexpected for large-scale learning. – WefurtherextendSTRONandusePCG,insteadofCGmethod,tosolvetheNewtonsysteminexactly. We have used weighted average of identity matrix and diagonal matrix as the preconditioner. But even this fails to work as expected for large-scalelearning. – Finally, our empirical experiments prove the efficacy of STRON against existing techniques with bench marked datasets. 3 2 Literature Review Stochastic approximation methods are very effective to deal with the large-scale learning problems due to their low per-iteration cost, e.g., SGD [33], but they lead to slow convergence rates due to the noisy approximation.Todealwiththenoiseissue,anumberoftechniqueshavebeenproposedandsomeofthe importanttechniques(asdiscussedin[16])are:(a)decreasinglearningrates[37],(b)usingmini-batching [13], (c) importance sampling [16], and (d) variance reduction [23]. The variance reduction methods can further be classified into three categories: primal methods [34, 15], dual methods [36] and primal-dual methods [39]. The variance reduction techniques are effective to deal with the large-scale learning problemsbecauseoflowper-iterationcomplexity,likeSGD, andhavefastlinearconvergence,likeGD.These techniques exploit the best of SGD and GD but for these stochastic variants of first order methods the convergenceislimitedtolinearrateonly,unlikethesecondordermethodswhichcangiveuptoquadratic rate. Secondorder methods utilize the curvature informationto guide the step directiontowardsthe solution and exhibit faster convergencethan the first order methods. But huge per-iteration cost due to the huge Hessianmatrix and its inversionmake the training of models slow for large-scaleproblems. So certaintechniqueshavebeendevelopedtodealwiththeissuesrelatedtoHessianmatrix,e.g.,quasi-Newton methods and inexact Newton methods are two major directions to deal with the huge computational cost of Newton method. Quasi-Newton methods approximate the Hessian matrix during each iteration, e.g., BFGS [20] and its limited memory variant, called L-BFGS [28], are examples of the quasi-Newton class which use gradient and parameter