of DL problems and the severe absence of regularity in DL (differential regularity is generally absent, but even weaker regularity such as semi-convexity or Clarke regularity are not always available). All sorts of practical and theoretical hardships are met: computing and even defining the Hessian is delicate, inverting them is unthinkable to this day, first and second-order Taylor approximations are unavailable due to non-smoothness, and finally one has to deal with “shocks” which are inherent to inertial approaches in a non-smooth context (“corners” and “walls” in the landscape of the loss function generate velocity discontinuity). This makes in particular the study of the popular algorithms ADAGRAD and ADAM in full generality quite difficult, with recent progresses reported in Barakat and Bianchi (2021). Our approach is inspired by the following continuous-time dynamical system introduced in Alvarez et al. (2002) and referred to as DIN (standing for “dynamical inertial Newton”): θ ¨ (t) + αθ ˙ (t) +β 2 (θ(t))θ ˙ (t)+ (θ(t)) = 0, for t [0,+ ), (1) ∇ J ∇J ∈ ∞ (cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) Inertialterm Frictionterm Newtonianeffects Gravityeffect where t is the time parameter which acts as a continuous epoch counter, is a given loss J function (e.g., the empirical loss in DL applications), for now assumed C2 (twice-differentiable), with gradient and Hessian 2 . It can be shown that solutions to (1) converge to critical ∇J ∇ J 2 points of (Alvarez et al., 2002). As such the discretization of (1) can support the design of J algorithms that optimize and that leverage inertial properties with Newton’s method. To J adapt this dynamics to DL we must first overcome the computational or conceptual difficulties raised by the second-order objects θ ¨and 2 (θ) appearing in (1). To do this, we propose in ∇ J this paper to combine a phase-space lifting method introduced in Alvarez et al. (2002) with the use of Clarke subdifferential ∂ . Clarke subdifferential defines a notion of differentiability J for non-convex and non-smooth functions. This approach results in the study of a first-order differential inclusion in place of (1), namely, (cid:40) θ ˙ (t)+β∂ (θ(t)) +(α 1)θ(t)+ 1ψ(t) 0 J − β β (cid:51) , for a.e. t (0,+ ). (2) ψ ˙ (t) +(α 1)θ(t)+ 1ψ(t) 0 ∈ ∞ − β β (cid:51) This differential inclusion can then be discretized to obtain the practical algorithm INNA that is introduced in Section 2, together with a rigorous presentation of the concepts mentioned above. Computation of the (sub)gradients and convergence proofs (in batch or mini-batch settings) typically rely on the sum-rule in smooth or convex settings, i.e., ∂( + ) = ∂ + ∂ . 1 2 1 2 J J J J Unfortunately this sum-rule does not hold in general in the non-convex setting using the standard Clarke subdifferential. Yet, many DL studies ignore the failure of the sum rule: they use it in practice, but circumvent the theoretical problem by modeling their method through simple dynamics (e.g., smooth or convex). We tackle this difficulty as is, and show that such practice can create additional spurious stationary points that are not Clarke-critical. To address this question, we introduce the notion of D-criticality. It is less stringent than Clarke-criticality and it describes more accurately real-world implementation. We then show convergence of INNA to such D-critical points. Our theoretical results are general, simple and allow for aggressive step-sizes in o(1/logk). We first provide adequate calculus rules and tame non-smooth Sard’s-like results for the new steady states we introduced. We then combine these results with a Lyapunov analysis from Alvarez et al. (2002) and the differential inclusion approximation method (Benaïm et al., 2005) to characterize the asymptotics of our algorithm similarly to Davis et al. (2020), Adil (2018). This provides a strong theoretical ground to our study since we can prove that our method converges to a connected component of the set of steady states even for networks with ReLU or other non-smooth activation functions. For the smooth deterministic dynamics, we also show that convergence in values is of the form O(1/t) where t is the running time. For doing so, we provide a general result for the solutions of a family of differential inclusions having a certain type of favorable Lyapunov functions. Our algorithm INNA shows great efficiency in practice. It has similar computational complexity to state-of-the-art methods SGD, ADAGRAD and ADAM, often achieves better training accuracy and shows good robustness to hyper-parameters selection. INNA can avoid parasitic oscillations and produce acceleration; a first illustration of the behavior of the induced dynamics is given in Figure 1 for a simple non-smooth and non-convex function in R2. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. INNA is introduced in details in Section 2 and its convergence is