1 , that is limsup γ logk = 0. k logk | k | k→+∞ Typical admissible choices are γ = C(k +1)−a with a (0,1], C > 0. The main theoretical k ∈ result of the paper follows. Theorem 3.1 (INNA converges to the set of D-critical points of ). Assume that for J n 1,...,N , each is locally Lipschitz continuous, tame and that the step-sizes satn ∈ { } J isfy Assumption 1. Set an initial condition (θ ,ψ ) and assume that there exists M > 0 such that 0 0 sup k≥0 (θ k ,ψ k ) M almost surely, where (θ k ,ψ k ) k∈N are generated by INNA. Then, almost surely, (cid:107) any accu (cid:107) m ≤ ulation point θ ¯ of the sequence (θ k ) k∈N satisfies D (θ ¯ ) 0. In addition J (cid:51) ( (θ k )) k∈N converges. J Before proving Theorem 3.1, we will first make some comments and illustrate this result. 3.2 Comments on the Results of Theorem 3.1 – On the step-sizes. First, Assumption 1 offers much more flexibility than the usual O(1/√k) assumption commonly used for SGD. We leverage the boundedness assumption on the norms of (θ ,ψ ), the local Lipschitz continuity and finite-sum structure of , so that the k k J noise is actually uniformly bounded and hence sub-Gaussian, allowing for much larger step-sizes than in the more common bounded second moment setting. See Benaïm et al. (2005, Remark 1.5) and Benaïm (1999) for more details. The interest of this aggressive strategy is highlighted in Figure 4 of the experimental section. – On the scope of the theorem. Our result actually holds for general locally Lipschitz continuous tame functions with finite-sum structure and for the general stochastic process under uniformly bounded martingale increment noise. We do not use any other specific structure of DL loss functions. Other variants could be considered depending on the assumptions on the noise, see Benaïm et al. (2005). – On D-criticality. The result of Theorem 3.1 states that the bounded discrete trajectories of INNA are attracted by the D-critical points. Recall that D-critical points include local minimizers and thus our theoretical finding agrees with our empirical observations that most initializations lead to “valuable weights” θ and to efficient training. In particular for smooth networks where is differentiable, limit points of INNA are simply critical points J of . The reader should however remember that when the algorithm is initialized on the J D-critical set, the algorithm is stationary as well, even when the initialization is non-Clarke critical. This last point shows that D-points are not introduced to simplify the analysis but to sharply model the use of mini-batch methods on non-convex and non-smooth problems. Hopefully, in practice one can expect to avoid such points with overwhelming probability. Indeed, Bolte and Pauwels (2020b) proved that SGD converges with probability one to the set of Clarke-critical points. In other words, D-critical points that are not Clarke-critical 10 are not seen by the dynamics (see also Bianchi et al. 2020). The key argument is to prove that the set of initializations and step-sizes that leads the algorithm to reach points where D = ∂ has zero-measure. The same result can be hoped for INNA. J (cid:54) J – On the boundedness assumption. The bounded assumption on the iterates is a classical assumption for first or second-order algorithms, see for instance Davis et al. (2020), Duchi and Ruan (2018). When using deterministic algorithms (i.e., without mini-batch approximations), properties such as the coercivity of can be sufficient to remove the J boundedness assumption for descent algorithms. This does not remain true when dealing with mini-batch approximations, yet, in the case of INNA, the coercivity of would J guarantee at least that the solutions of the continuous underlying differential inclusion (11) remain bounded. Indeed, we will prove in Section 3.4 that for any solution (θ,ψ) of (cid:13) (cid:13)2 (11), the function E(θ(t),ψ(t)) (cid:44) 2(1+αβ) (θ(t))+(cid:13)(α 1)θ(t)+ 1ψ(t)(cid:13) is decreasing J (cid:13) − β β (cid:13) in time (see Lemma 3.6 hereafter). As a consequence, we cannot have (θ(t)) J −t−→−∞→ ∞ so θ(t) due to the coercivity of . In addition this guarantees ψ(t) as (cid:107) (cid:107) (cid:54)→ ∞ J (cid:107) (cid:107) (cid:54)→ ∞ well. However, DL loss functions are not coercive in general and studying the boundedness issue in DL or even for non-convex semi-algebraic problems is far beyond the scope of this paper. Let us however mention that it is not uncommon to project the iterates on a given large ball to ensure boundedness; this is a matter for future research. 3.3 Preliminary Variational Results Prior to proving Theorem 3, we extend some results known for the Clarke subdifferential of tame functions to the operator D that we