action a and state s which maximize U(s,a) and add the new state to the tree, if it does not exist, with the neural network estimates P(a|s),v(s) or call the search recursively. Finally, the search terminates and a pipeline is realized and applied to the data to solve the task, resulting in an actual evaluation e of running the generated pipeline on the data and task. 2.2 Pipeline Grammar We use a context free grammar (CFG) (Chomsky, 1956) to add domain knowledge for generating valid pipelines represented as strings. A CFG is represented by a four-tuple < T,N,P,S > where T is the set of terminals which are the components that make the string, N the set of non-terminals which are placeholders for patterns of terminals that are generated from them, P the set of production rules for replacing a non-terminal with other non-terminals or terminals and S the start symbol, which is a special non-terminal symbol that appears in the initial string generated by the grammar. We use the prior knowledge of working pipelines for specific tasks in constructing the CFG for generating machine learning pipelines for that task. For example, for classification and regression tasks the pipeline usually consists of data cleaning, data transformation and an estimator (classifier or regressor) primitives in that order. Data cleaning consists of primitives that fix the data to make it suitable as inputs to the estimators, such as imputing missing values. Data transformation primitives transform the original data, for example, dimensionality reduction, categorical value encoding, and feature selection. Estimators are the learning primitives, which for a classification task are a set of classifiers such as Naive Bayes and SVM, and for regression are a set of regressors such as Linear and Ridge Regression. Based on this sequence of components for classification and regression tasks we define the CFG, using Sklearn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) primitives, for classification as shown in Table 1. Our system is configurable with different grammars for a given task. 3. Results For evaluation we used 296 tabular datasets from OpenML (Vanschoren et al., 2014) consisting of both classification and regression tasks. For our comparison with AutoSklearn as a baseline (Guyon et al., 2019), we used only comparable Sklearn primitives, specifically 2 4 AutoMLbyPipelineSynthesisusingModel-BasedReinforcementLearningandaGrammar (a) (b) Figure 2: (a) Comparison of performance with and without using a pipeline grammar: Each point represents an OpenML dataset. Performance is not degraded even though computation time is reduced. (b) Comparison of log mean total actions with and without a grammar. data cleaning, 11 data transformation, 16 classification and 22 regression primitives. While AutoSklearn is limited to using the Sklearn library, AlphaD3M can be configured with machine learning primitives from other libraries. 3.1 Pipeline Grammar Figure 2(a) compares performance with and without a pipeline grammar. Each point represents one of 74 different OpenML datasets on a classification task, showing that performance is maintained, across the diagonal, even though using a grammar significantly reduces the search space. Figure 2(b) compares the logarithm of the mean of total actions with and without a pipeline grammar, showing a significant reduction in the search space size. Using the pipeline grammar is on average between two and three times as fast than without using the grammar. Using the grammar reduces the average depth of the MCTS by an order of magnitude and decreases the branching factor of the MCTS on average by three-fold compared to the non-grammar. 3.2 Pre-trained Model Comparing between AutoML methods requires taking into account both performance and runningtime. Givensufficientrunningtime, mostmethodssearchthespaceuntilreachingan optimal solution, so our interest is in comparing between the efficiency of different methods. We therefore compare performance across multiple running times, which unveils how the methods progress. Specifically the most interesting difference occurs during the first minutes of computation. Figure 3 compares performance between AlphaD3M using a grammar and a model pre-trained on other datasets (dark green), AlphaD3M using a grammar trained from scratch tabula rasa (light green), and AutoSklearn (gray). We used the same Sklearn machine learning primitives for both AlphaD3M and AutoSklearn, on a sample of benchmark AutoML datasets, running on a cluster with 4 Tesla 100 GPU’s. The horizontal axis denotes 5 DroriandKrishnamurthyanddePaulaLourencoandRampinandChoandSilvaandFreire Figure 3: Performance-time comparison between (i) AlphaD3M using a pre-trained model andagrammar,(ii)modeltrainedtabularasaandagrammar,(iii)AutoSklearn. Allmethods (including brute force) perform comparably given sufficient time using same primitives, the difference is in performance given equal times. Method (i) is faster than (ii) which in turn is faster than (iii). Performance is F1 and time is in seconds on an exponential scale. Figure 4: Ablation comparison between number of steps of MCTS with NN vs. MCTS only. time in 2i seconds for i = 1,...,8, (ie left is better by an exponential factor in time). The vertical axis denotes F1-score in [0,1], (ie higher is better). Our pre-trained model meta learns from