using a pre-trained model andagrammar,(ii)modeltrainedtabularasaandagrammar,(iii)AutoSklearn. Allmethods (including brute force) perform comparably given sufficient time using same primitives, the difference is in performance given equal times. Method (i) is faster than (ii) which in turn is faster than (iii). Performance is F1 and time is in seconds on an exponential scale. Figure 4: Ablation comparison between number of steps of MCTS with NN vs. MCTS only. time in 2i seconds for i = 1,...,8, (ie left is better by an exponential factor in time). The vertical axis denotes F1-score in [0,1], (ie higher is better). Our pre-trained model meta learns from other datasets and quickly generalizes reaching a result within 4 seconds (blue), including meta feature computation time. This is twice as fast as learning from scratch tabula rasa and our results demonstrate improvement in performance compared to learning the network from scratch. In turn, our method learning tabula rasa reaches a result twice as fast as AutoSklearn, with comparable performance. In AlphaD3M and AlphaZero, the neural network policy converges in the limit to the Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) policy, however the difference is in efficiency. Figure 4 compares the number of steps required for reaching the same performance using only MCTS with MCTS and a neural network. 4. Conclusions WeextendedAlphaD3M,anautomaticmachinelearningsystembyusingapipelinegrammar and a pre-trained model. We analyzed the contribution of our extensions, comparing performance with and without a grammar, learning from scratch and using a pre-trained model, across time at fine granularity. Our results demonstrate competitive performance while being an order of magnitude faster than existing state-of-the-art AutoML methods. Our system is open, supporting any set of machine learning primitives, such as D3M, Sklearn, or general operations, thus opening the door for other application domains. In the spirit of reproducible research we make the data, models, and code available (Drori et al., 2019). 6 AutoMLbyPipelineSynthesisusingModel-BasedReinforcementLearningandaGrammar References Thomas Anthony, Zheng Tian, and David Barber. Thinking fast and slow with deep learning and tree search. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 5360–5370, 2017. James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, pages 281–305, 2012. BoyuanChen,HarveyWu,WarrenMo,IshanuChattopadhyay,andHodLipson. Autostacker: Acompositionalevolutionarylearningsystem. The Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pages 402–409, 2018. Noam Chomsky. Three models for the description of language. IRE Transactions on information theory, 2(3):113–124, 1956. Alex GC de S´a, Walter Jos´e GS Pinto, Luiz Otavio VB Oliveira, and Gisele L Pappa. Recipe: a grammar-based framework for automatically evolving classification pipelines. In European Conference on Genetic Programming, pages 246–261. Springer, 2017. Iddo Drori, Yamuna Krishnamurthy, Remi Rampin, Raoni de Paula Lourenco, Jorge Piazentin Ono, Kyunghyun Cho, Claudio Silva, and Juliana Freire. AlphaD3M: Machine learning pipeline synthesis. International Workshop on Automatic Machine Learning, ICML, 2018. Iddo Drori, Yamuna Krishnamurthy, Remi Rampin, Raoni de Paula Lourenco, Kyunghyun Cho, Claudio Silva, and Juliana Freire. Code for automatic machine learning by pipeline synthesis using model-based reinforcement learning and a grammar, 2019. URL https: //www.dropbox.com/sh/zgvr6revq6qyb5w/AAAJc5IMYOVHaM3di3cxhjMaa?dl=0. Matthias Feurer, Aaron Klein, Katharina Eggensperger, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Manuel Blum, and Frank Hutter. Efficient and robust automated machine learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2755–2763, 2015. Nicolo Fusi, Rishit Sheth, and Melih Elibol. Probabilistic matrix factorization for automated machinelearning. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems,pages3348–3357, 2018. Pieter Gijsbers, Joaquin Vanschoren, and Randal S Olson. Layered TPOT: Speeding up tree-based pipeline optimization. Workshop on Automatic Selection, Configuration and Composition of Machine Learning Algorithms, 2017. Isabelle Guyon, Lisheng Sun-Hosoya, Marc Boull´e, Hugo Jair Escalante, Sergio Escalera, Zhengying Liu, Damir Jajetic, Bisakha Ray, Mehreen Saeed, Mich´ele Sebag, Alexander Statnikov, WeiWei Tu, and Evelyne Viegas. Analysis of the automl challenge series 2015-2018. In AutoML, Springer series on Challenges in Machine Learning, 2019. Sepp Hochreiter and Ju¨rgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997. 7 DroriandKrishnamurthyanddePaulaLourencoandRampinandChoandSilvaandFreire Frank Hutter, Lars Kotthoff, and Joaquin Vanschoren. Automated Machine Learning: Methods, Systems, Challenges. Springer, 2019. Lars Kotthoff, Chris Thornton, Holger H Hoos, Frank Hutter, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Auto-WEKA 2.0: Automatic model selection and hyperparameter optimization in WEKA. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):826–830, 2017. Mitar Milutinovic, Atlm Gunes Baydi, Robert Zinkov, William Harvey, Dawn Song, and Frank Wood. End-to-end training of differentiable pipelines across machine learning frameworks. In NeurIPS Autodiff Workshop, 2017. Randal Olson and Jason Moore. TPOT: A tree-based pipeline optimization tool for automating machine learning. In Workshop on Automatic Machine Learning, pages 66–74, 2016. Fabian Pedregosa, Ga¨el Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. Journal of machine learning research, 12(Oct): 2825–2830, 2011. Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian processes in machine learning. In Summer School on Machine Learning, pages 63–71. Springer, 2003. David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, Shogi, and Go