gradient-based optimization for the tuning of hyperparameters (Bengio, 2000). Recent work in this area include reversible learning (Maclaurin et al., 2015), which allows gradient-based optimization of hyperparameters through a training run consisting of multiple iterations, and hypergradient descent (Baydin et al., 2018), which achieves a similar optimization in an online, per-gradient-update, fashion. Meta-learningisoftenreferredtoas“learningtolearn”(ThrunandPratt,2012),meaning a learning procedure (most of the time gradient-based) is able to improve aspects of the learning process itself, such as the optimizer, hyperparameters like the learning rate, and initializations. In this sense, the “meta” concept of meta-learning has aspects in common with hyperparameter optimization. The MAML model (Finn et al., 2017) on which we base our method, relies on meta-optimization through gradient descent in a model-agnostic way. Another recent method, Meta-SGD (Li et al., 2017), performs online optimization of a per-parameter learning rate vector α, to which the authors refer as learning both the learning rate and update direction (because of the per-parameter nature being able to modify direction), and model parameters θ, using a single hyper-learning rate β. Our work differs from Meta-SGD as we perform simultaneous online optimization of both MAML learning rates α and β, which are both scalars. 3. Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) The MAML algorithm, given model parameters θ, aims to adapt to a new task T with SGD: t θ(cid:48) = θ−α∇ L (f ) , (1) t θ T train(t) θ where t is the task number and α is the learning rate. T and T denote the train(t) test(t) training and test set within task t. The tasks are sampled from a defined p(T). The meta-objective is: minL (f ) = L (f ) (2) θ T test(t) θ t (cid:48) T test(t) θ−α∇ θ LTtrain(t) (f θ ) 2 Alpha MAML: Adaptive Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning Algorithm 1 MAML Input: p(T):distributionovertasks. Input: α,β:learningrates randomlyinitializeθ. whilenotdonedo SamplebatchoftasksTt∼p(T) forallTt do Evaluate∇ θ LTtrain(t) (f θ )withrespecttoK examples. Computeadaptedparameterswithgradientdescent: θ t (cid:48) =θ−α∇ θ LTtrain(t) (f θ ) endfor Updateθ=θ−β∇ θ (cid:80) Tt∼p(T) LTtest(t) (f θt (cid:48)) endwhile Algorithm 2 Alpha MAML Input: p(T):distributionovertasks. Input: α0,β0:initiallearningrates Input: α ,β :hypergradientlearningrates hyperlr hyperlr randomlyinitializeθ. whilenotdonedo SamplebatchoftasksTt∼p(T) forallTt do Evaluate∇ θ LTtrain(t) (f θ )withrespecttoK examples. Computeadaptedparameterswithgradientdescent: θ t (cid:48) =θ−αi∇ θ LTtrain(t) (f θ ) endfor α β θi i i+ = = 1 θ β = i i − − α 1 1 i − + + β β α i h h (cid:80) y y p p T e e r t r l ∼ l r r (cid:80) p (cid:80) (T T T ) t t ∼ ∇ ∼ p p θ ( ( i T − T ) 1 ) ∇ L ∇ T θ θ i t t (cid:48) − e L s 1 t T L (t t T ) es ( t t e f ( s θ t t t (cid:48) ) ( ) ( t) f ( θ f t (cid:48) θ ) t (cid:48) .∇ ).∇ θi− θi 1 − L 2 T L t T ra te in st ( ( t i ) − (f 1) θ ( i− f θ 1 t (cid:48) ) ) endwhile The model aims to optimize the parameters θ such that with just one SGD step it can adapt to the new task. For the optimization in Eq. 2, this looks as follows: θ = θ−β∇ L (f ) , (3) t θ T test(t) θ t (cid:48) where β is the meta step size. This gives an algorithm that learns an initialization of θ that is useful for being adapted to new tasks efficiently with a small number of iterations. An important advantage is that this is achieved without making any assumptions on the form of the model. Another advantage is that the meta-learner, introduced in this way based on conventional gradient descent, does not introduce extra model parameters to learn as in model-based approaches in meta-learning. The full algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1. It can be seen that unlike usual SGD which has only one learning rate, MAML has two learning rates α and β, which require time-consuming hyperparameter tuning. 4. Alpha MAML Eq. 1 is regular gradient descent for adapting to the task t, with α being the task-level learning rate. Similarly, Eq. 3 is regular gradient descent for the meta update, with β being the meta-learning rate. In addition to the update rules in Equations 1 and 3, we would like to derive update rules for the learning rates α and β as well. Our algorithm, Alpha MAML, can simply be written in four update equations as shown in the following derivation. Here i is the iteration number. We first derive the algorithm for the simpler case when each batch has only one task, thus the iteration number is same as the