sometimes called tameness. We now introduce this notion which is essential to obtain the convergence results of Section 3. 2.2 Neural Networks and Tameness in a Nutshell Tameness refers to a ubiquitous geometrical property of loss functions and constraints encompassing most finite dimensional optimization problems met in practice. Prominent classes of tame objects are piecewise-linear or piecewise-polynomial objects (with finitely many pieces), and more generally, semi-algebraic objects. However, the notion is much more general, as we intend to convey below. The formal definition is given at the end of this subsection (Definition 1). Informally, sets or functions are called tame when they can be described by a finite number of basic formulas, inequalities, or Boolean operations involving standard functions such as polynomial, exponential, or max functions. We refer to Attouch et al. (2010) for illustrations, recipes and examples within a general optimization setting or Davis et al. (2020) for illustrations in the context of neural networks. The reader is referred to Van den Dries (1998), Coste (2000), Shiota (2012) for foundational material. To apprehend the strength behind tameness it is convenient to remember that it models non-smoothness by confining the study to sets and functions which are union of smooth pieces. This is the so-called stratification property of tame sets and functions. It was this property which motivated the term of tame topology,1 see Van den Dries (1998). In a non-convex optimization settings, the stratification property is crucial to generalize qualitative algorithmic results to non-smooth objects. Most finite dimensional DL optimization models we are aware of yield tame loss functions . To understand this assertion and illustrate the wide scope of tameness assumptions, let J us provide concrete examples (see also Davis et al. 2020). Assume that the DNNs under consideration are built from the following traditional components: – thenetworkarchitecturedescribingf isfixedwithanarbitrarynumberoflayersofarbitrary dimensions and arbitrary Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) representing computations, – the activation functions are among classical ones: ReLU, sigmoid, SQNL, RReLU, tanh, APL, soft plus, soft clipping, and many others including multivariate activation functions (norm, sorting), or activation functions defined piecewise with polynomials, exponential and logarithm, – the dissimilarity function l is a standard loss such as (cid:96) norms, logistic loss or crossp entropy, or more generally a function defined piecewise using polynomials, exponentials and logarithms, then one can easily show, by elementary quantifier elimination arguments (property (iii) below), that the corresponding loss, , is tame. J For the sake of completeness, we provide below the formal definition of tameness and o-minimality. Definition 1. [o-minimal structure] (Coste, 2000, Definition1.5) An o-minimal structure on ( R,+,.) is a countable collection of sets = where each is itself a collection of q q≥1 q subsets of Rq, called definable subsets. They O mus { t O ha } ve the following p O roperties, for each q 1: ≥ 1“La topologie modérée” wished for by Grothendieck. 5 (i) (Boolean properties) contains the empty set, is stable by finite union, finite intersection q O and complementation; (ii) (Lifting property) if A belongs to , then A R and R A belong to . q q+1 O × × O (iii) (Projection or quantifier elimination property) if Π : Rq+1 Rq is the canonical projection onto Rq then for any A in , the set Π(A) belongs to → . q+1 q O O (iv) (Semi-algebraicity) contains the family of algebraic subsets of Rq, that is, every set of q O the form θ Rq ζ(θ) = 0 , { ∈ | } where ζ : Rq R is a polynomial function. → (v) (Minimality property), the elements of are exactly the finite unions of intervals and 1 O points. A mapping F : S Rm Rq is said to be definable in if its graph is definable in as a subset of Rm Rq. ⊂ For ill → ustration of o-minimality in the c O ontext of optimization one is r O eferred × to Attouch et al. (2010), Davis et al. (2020). From now on we fix an o-minimal structure and a set or a mapping definable O in will be called tame. O 2.3 From DIN to INNA We describe in this section the construction of our proposed algorithm INNA from the discretization of the second-order ODE (1). 2.3.1 Handling Non-smoothness and Non-convexity We first show how the formalism offered by Clarke’s subdifferential can be applied to generalize (1) to the non-smooth non-convex setting. Recall that the dynamical system (1) is described by, θ ¨ (t)+αθ ˙ (t)+β 2 (θ(t))θ ˙ (t)+ (θ(t)) = 0, (4) ∇ J ∇J where is a twice-differentiable potential, α > 0, β > 0 are two hyper-parameters and θ : R J RP. We cannot exploit (4) directly since in most DL applications is not twice + → J differentiable (and even not differentiable