An Inertial Newton Algorithm for Deep Learning Camille Castera∗ Jérôme Bolte † IRIT, Université de Toulouse, CNRS Toulouse School of Economics Toulouse, France Université de Toulouse Toulouse, France Cédric Févotte Edouard Pauwels † † IRIT, Université de Toulouse, CNRS IRIT, Université de Toulouse, CNRS Toulouse, France DEEL, IRT Saint Exupery Toulouse, France July 29, 2021 Abstract We introduce a new second-order inertial optimization method for machine learning called INNA. It exploits the geometry of the loss function while only requiring stochastic approximations of the function values and the generalized gradients. This makes INNA fully implementable and adapted to large-scale optimization problems such as the training of deep neural networks. The algorithm combines both gradient-descent and Newton-like behaviors as well as inertia. We prove the convergence of INNA for most deep learning problems. To do so, we provide a well-suited framework to analyze deep learning loss functions involving tame optimization in which we study a continuous dynamical system togetherwithitsdiscretestochasticapproximations. Weprovesublinearconvergenceforthe continuous-time differential inclusion which underlies our algorithm. Additionally, we also show how standard optimization mini-batch methods applied to non-smooth non-convex problems can yield a certain type of spurious stationary points never discussed before. We address this issue by providing a theoretical framework around the new idea of D-criticality; we then give a simple asymptotic analysis of INNA. Our algorithm allows for using an aggressive learning rate of o(1/logk). From an empirical viewpoint, we show that INNA returns competitive results with respect to state of the art (stochastic gradient descent, ADAGRAD, ADAM) on popular deep learning benchmark problems. Keywords. deeplearning,non-convexoptimization,second-ordermethods,dynamicalsystems, stochastic optimization 1 Introduction Can we devise a learning algorithm for general deep neural networks (DNNs) featuring inertia and Newtonian directional intelligence only by means of backpropagation? In an optimization ∗Corresponding author: camille.castera@protonmail.com †Last three authors are listed in alphabetical order. 1 1202 luJ 82 ]GL.sc[ 6v87221.5091:viXra jargon: can we use second-order ideas in time and space for non-smooth non-convex optimization by only using a subgradient oracle? Before providing some answers to this question, let us have a glimpse at some fundamental optimization algorithms for training DNNs. The backpropagation algorithm is, to this day, the fundamental block to compute gradients in deep learning (DL). It is used in most instances of the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithm (Robbins and Monro, 1951). The latter is powerful, flexible, capable of handling large-size problems, noise, and further comes with theoretical guarantees of many kinds. We refer to Bottou and Bousquet (2008), Moulines and Bach (2011) in a convex machine learning context and Bottou et al. (2018) for a recent account highlighting the importance of DL applications and their challenges. In the non-convex setting, recent works of Adil (2018), Davis et al. (2020) follow the Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE) approach introduced in Ljung (1977), and further developed in Benaïm (1999), Kushner and Yin (2003), Benaïm et al. (2005), Borkar (2009). Two research directions have been explored in order to improve SGD’s training efficiency: – using local geometry of empirical loss functions to obtain steeper descent directions, – using past steps history to design larger step-sizes in the present. The first approach is akin to quasi-Newton methods while the second revolves around Polyak’s inertial method (Polyak, 1964). The latter is inspired by the following appealing mechanical thought-experiment. Consider a heavy ball evolving on the graph of the loss function (the loss function’s landscape), subject to gravity and stabilized by some friction effects. Friction generates energy dissipation, so that the particle will eventually reach a steady state which one hopes to be a local minimum. These two approaches are already present in the DL literature: among the most popular algorithms for training DNNs, ADAGRAD (Duchi et al., 2011) features local geometrical aspects while ADAM (Kingma and Ba, 2015) combines inertial ideas with stepsizes similar to the ones of ADAGRAD. Stochastic Newton and quasi-Newton algorithms have been considered by Martens (2010), Byrd et al. (2011, 2016) and recently reported performing efficiently on several problems (Berahas et al., 2020, Xu et al., 2020). The work of Wilson et al. (2017) demonstrates that carefully tuned SGD and heavy-ball algorithms are competitive with concurrent methods. However, deviating from the simplicity of SGD also comes with major challenges because of the high dimensionality of DL problems and the severe absence of regularity in DL (differential regularity is generally absent, but even weaker regularity such as semi-convexity or Clarke regularity are not always available). All sorts of practical and theoretical hardships are met: computing and even defining the Hessian is delicate, inverting them is unthinkable to this day, first and second-order Taylor approximations are unavailable due to non-smoothness, and finally one has to deal with “shocks” which are inherent to inertial approaches in a non-smooth context (“corners” and “walls” in the landscape of the loss function generate velocity discontinuity). This makes in particular the