6thICMLWorkshoponAutomatedMachineLearning(2019) Automatic Machine Learning by Pipeline Synthesis using Model-Based Reinforcement Learning and a Grammar Iddo Drori idrori@nyu.edu Yamuna Krishnamurthy∗ yamuna@nyu.edu Raoni de Paula Lourenco raoni@nyu.edu Remi Rampin remi.rampin@nyu.edu Kyunghyun Cho kyunghyun.cho@nyu.edu Claudio Silva csilva@nyu.edu Juliana Freire juliana.freire@nyu.edu New York University Abstract Automatic machine learning is an important problem in the forefront of machine learning. The strongest AutoML systems are based on neural networks, evolutionary algorithms, and Bayesian optimization. Recently AlphaD3M reached state-of-the-art results with an order of magnitude speedup using reinforcement learning with self-play. In this work we extend AlphaD3M by using a pipeline grammar and a pre-trained model which generalizes from many different datasets and similar tasks. Our results demonstrate improved performance compared with our earlier work and existing methods on AutoML benchmark datasets for classification and regression tasks. In the spirit of reproducible research we make our data, models, and code publicly available. 1. Introduction Machine learning has three main axes: dataset, task, and solution. Given a dataset, a well-defined machine learning task, and an evaluation criteria, the goal is to solve the task with respect to the dataset while optimizing performance. There are Automatic machine learning (AutoML) (Hutter et al., 2019) problems of increasing difficulty, starting with hyperparameter optimization of a specific algorithm, to the selection of algorithms and their hyperparameter optimization, and finally meta learning, which entails synthesizing an entire machine learning pipeline from machine learning primitives. In this work we present a system that automates model discovery, solving well-defined machine learning tasks on unseen datasets by learning to generate machine learning pipelines from basic primitives. Our goal is to search within a large space of machine learning primitives and parameters, which together constitute a pipeline, for solving a task on a given dataset. The challenge is that the search space of pipelines, primitives and hyperparamaters is high dimensional. Similarly, programs for playing board games such as chess and Go are faced with the challenge of searching in a high dimensional space. We formulate the AutoML problem of pipeline synthesis as a single-player game, in which the player starts from an empty pipeline, and in each step is allowed to perform edit operations to add, remove, or replace pipeline components according to a pipeline grammar. A sequence of game steps results in a complete pipeline which is executed on the dataset to solve the task, evaluated by pipeline performance. Formally, an entire pipeline is a state, an action corresponds to modifying the ∗. Y. Krishnamurthy is currently a doctoral candidate at Royal Holloway, University of London. (cid:13)c2019I.Drori,Y.Krishnamurthy,R.dePaulaLourenco,R.Rampin,K.Cho,C.SilvaandJ.Freire. 9102 yaM 42 ]GL.sc[ 1v54301.5091:viXra DroriandKrishnamurthyanddePaulaLourencoandRampinandChoandSilvaandFreire Figure 1: Architecture: the neural network sequence model (left) receives an entire pipeline, meta features, and task as input. The network estimates action probabilities and pipeline evaluations. The MCTS (right) uses the network estimates to guide simulations which terminate at actual pipeline evaluations (square leaf nodes). current pipeline to derive a new pipeline, and pipeline performance is the reward. Thus, our approach is based on reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto, 2018). An inherent advantage of this approach is that we have the provenance of all actions and decisions leading to a given pipeline, which provides an explanation for the synthesis process. Early programs for chess and Go searched a large space of millions of positions. AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2018) reduced this search by three orders of magnitude using a general reinforcement learning algorithm. Inspired by expert iteration (Anthony et al., 2017) we use a neural network for predicting pipeline performance and action probabilities along with a Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) which makes strong decisions based on the network, asshowninFigure1. Theprocessprogressesbyselfplaywithiterativeselfimprovement, and is known to be highly efficient at finding a solution to search problems in high dimensional spaces. Considering all combinations of machine learning primitives would result in many invalid pipelines. Therefore, we use a pipeline grammar which reduces the search space even further. Using a grammar decreases the branching factor and average depth of the MCTS. Our approach allows to learn to synthesize a pipeline from scratch, tabula rasa, or to generalize from many different datasets and similar tasks by using a pre-trained neural network. The main contributions of this work are: 1. Pipeline grammar: reducing the branching factor and average search depth. We compare performance across time, with and without a grammar. 2. Pre-trained model: generalizing from many different datasets and similar tasks in contrast with learning from scratch every time. 3. Meta learning minute: we investigate performance using benchmark AutoML datasets across time, focusing on the first minutes of computation. Our results demonstrate competitive performance with computation time which is an order of magnitude faster than the latest AutoSklearn. 4. Open source: in the spirit of reproducible research we make our data, models, and code publicly available (Drori et al., 2019). Existing AutoML systems use methods such as differentiable