6thICMLWorkshoponAutomatedMachineLearning(2019) Alpha MAML: Adaptive Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning Harkirat Singh Behl harkirat@robots.ox.ac.uk Atılım Gu¨ne¸s Baydin gunes@robots.ox.ac.uk Philip H.S. Torr phst@robots.ox.ac.uk University of Oxford Abstract Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) is a meta-learning technique to train a model on a multitude of learning tasks in a way that primes the model for few-shot learning of new tasks. The MAML algorithm performs well on few-shot learning problems in classification, regression, and fine-tuning of policy gradients in reinforcement learning, but comes with the need for costly hyperparameter tuning for training stability. We address this shortcoming by introducing an extension to MAML, called Alpha MAML, to incorporate an online hyperparameter adaptation scheme that eliminates the need to tune meta-learning and learning rates. Our results with the Omniglot database demonstrate a substantial reduction in the need to tune MAML training hyperparameters and improvement to training stability with less sensitivity to hyperparameter choice. 1. Introduction Meta-learning—or “learning to learn”—concerns machine learning models that can improve theirlearningqualitybyalteringaspectsofthelearningprocesssuchasthemodelarchitecture, optimization rules, initialization, or learning hyperparameters (Thrun and Pratt, 2012; Schmidhuber, 1987; Hochreiter et al., 2001). An important application of meta-learning is in few-shot learning problems (Vinyals et al., 2016; Behl et al., 2018), where one is concerned with developing methods able to learn new concepts from one or only a few instances (Lake et al., 2015). In this paper we focus on the state-of-the-art model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) (Finn et al., 2017) method, which is a conceptually simple and general algorithm that has been shown to outperform existing approaches in tasks including few-shot image classification and few-shot adaptation in reinforcement learning (Antoniou et al., 2019). MAML aims to solve the few-shot learning problem by being just few gradient descent steps away from any new concepts, doing so by making the assumption that learning a new concept will just involve few parameter updates (Algorithm 1). In other words, MAML is based on learning an initial representation that can be efficiently fine-tuned for new tasks in a few steps. The generality of MAML comes with the difficulty of choosing hyperparameters to achieve stable training in practice (Antoniou et al., 2019). MAML has two important hyper-parameters, namely the learning rate α and the meta-learning rate β, thus increasing any hyperparameter grid search computation by an order, and making it significantly more time and resource consuming than comparable methods. Another complication to this problem is the fact that it is currently not established whether the technique can benefit from a conventional decaying schedule for the inner learning rate α. Furthermore, a good value of α in MAML is even more important than for any conventional stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimization, because only a handful of samples are available in the few-shot learning case. This has significant consequences, making it difficult to scale this algorithm (cid:13)c2019H.S.Behl,A.G.Baydin,andP.H.S.Torr. 9102 yaM 71 ]GL.sc[ 1v53470.5091:viXra Behl, Baydin and Torr to problems bigger than toy scales, due to the difficulty in assessing whether MAML is not suitable for a complex task or whether the hyperparameters are not sufficiently tuned. In this paper, we provide a conceptually simple solution to this problem, by introducing an extension of the MAML algorithm to incorporate adaptive tuning of both the learning rate α and the meta-learning rate β. Our aim is to make it possible to use MAML without or with significantly less parameter tuning, and thus to reduce the need for grid search. We also aim to make the algorithm converge in fewer iterations. The solution we propose is based on the hypergradient descent (HD) algorithm (Baydin et al., 2018), which automatically updates a learning rate by performing gradient descent on the learning rate alongside original optimization steps. The proposed algorithm does not need any extra gradient computations, and just involves storing the gradients from the previous optimization step. 2. Related Work Our work is primarily related with the subfields of hyperparameter optimization and metalearning. In hyperparameter optimization one typically uses parallel runs to populate a selected grid of hyperparameter values (e.g., a range of learning rates), or use more advanced techniques such as Bayesian optimization (Snoek et al., 2012) and model-based approaches (Bergstra et al., 2013; Hutter et al., 2013). An interesting line of research, which also inspired our approach in this paper, is to use gradient-based optimization for the tuning of hyperparameters (Bengio, 2000). Recent work in this area include reversible learning (Maclaurin et al., 2015), which allows gradient-based optimization of hyperparameters through a training run consisting of multiple iterations, and hypergradient descent (Baydin et al., 2018), which achieves a similar optimization in an online, per-gradient-update, fashion. Meta-learningisoftenreferredtoas“learningtolearn”(ThrunandPratt,2012),meaning a learning procedure (most of the time gradient-based) is able to improve aspects of the learning process itself, such as the optimizer, hyperparameters like the learning rate, and initializations. In this sense, the “meta” concept of meta-learning has aspects in common with hyperparameter optimization. The MAML model