Automatic Layout Generation with Applications in Machine Learning Engine Evaluation Haoyu Yang∗, Wen Chen∗, Piyush Pathak†, Frank Gennari†, Ya-Chieh Lai†, Bei Yu∗ ∗The Chinese University of Hong Kong †Cadence Design Systems, Inc. Email: hyyang,byu @cse.cuhk.edu.hk { } Abstract—Machine learning-based lithography hotspot detection has been deeply studied recently, from varies feature extraction techniques to efficient learning models. It has been observed that such machine learning-based frameworks are providing satisfactory metal layer hotspot prediction results on known public metal layer benchmarks. In this work, we seek to evaluate how these machine learning-based hotspot detectorsgeneralizetocomplicatedpatterns.Wefirstintroduce a automatic layout generation tool that can synthesize varies layout patterns given a set of design rules. The tool currently supports both metal layer and via layer generation. As a case study, we conduct hotspot detection on the generated (a)Lowviadensity (b)Highviadensity via layer layouts with representative machine learning-based Fig. 1 Visualization of generated via patterns. Vias are hotspotdetectors,whichshowsthatcontinuousstudyonmodel randomly placed at the intersection region of given upper robustness and generality is necessary to prototype and integrate the learning engines in DFM flows. The source code of andlowermetalshapeswithapredeterminedprobabilitythat the layout generation tool will be available at https://github. controls via density. com/phdyang007/layout-generation. I. INTRODUCTION OPC recipe development. An examples of via layers with The rapid development of machine learning techniques differentdensitycanbefoundinFig.1,wheretheupperand have brought promising alternatives to design for manufacthelowermetalgratingsareintentionallyplacedtoassistvia turabilityproblems,especiallyforlithographyhotspotdetecgeneration. tion. Related researches range from varies feature extraction As a case study, we conduct hotspot detection on the gentechniques[1]–[7]andefficientlearningmodels[1],[8]–[13]. eratedvialayerlayoutswithrepresentativemachinelearningMost of these frameworks are presenting very high hotspot based hotspot detectors [1], [8], [10], which adopt smoothdetection accuracy with reasonable false positive overhead. boosting [1], shallow convolutional neural networks [8], However, most of them are targeting at a public benchmark [10], respectively. Although these hotspot detectors achieve at legacy technology node from ICCAD2012 CAD Contest promisingresultsonICCAD2012CADcontestbenchmarks, [14], with carefully designed and tuned parameters and we show performance degradation occurs with complex machine learning engines. dataset,whichimpliescontinuousstudyonmodelrobustness In this paper, we seek to evaluate how these machine and generality is necessary to prototype and integrate the learning-based hotspot detectors generalize to complicated learning engines in DFM flows. The contributions of this patterns. We first introduce an automatic layout generation paper are listed below. tool that can synthesize various layout patterns given a set of design rules. Unlike the existing pattern generation • WedevelopalayoutgenerationtoolkitwithPythonand KLayout [17] backbones, to support efficient unidirecsolutions that seek to increase the pattern space within tional metal layer and via/contact generation. a constrained Euclidean distance [15], [16], the proposed automaticgenerationflowgeneratespatternsforcertainDRC • We feed the generated via layers into a commercial lithography simulator and construct a via layer hotspot constrained designs. benchmark suit for hotspot detector evaluation. The tool supports both metal layer and via layer generation. In the configuration files, we can manually achieve • Evaluationexperimentsshowthatrepresentativehotspot detectors may fail to exhibit a satisfactory detection certain layout properties including tip to tip distance, wire performanceoneitheraccuracyorfalsepositivepenalty. CD, layout density, via density and so on. These configurations enable a generation of diverse layout patterns under The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II a given technology node, which can be applied to various describes details of the layout generation flow. Section III DFM research and analysis including hotspot detection and presents a case study of state-of-the-art hotspot detector 9102 ceD 21 ]GL.sc[ 1v69750.2191:viXra evaluation, followed by conclusion in Section IV. line-end to line-end distance II. ALAYOUTGENERATIONTOOLKIT track 1 In this section, we will introduce the details of our layout track pitch generation flow with Python and KLayout backbones. In current version, we support unidirectional metal layer and track 2 wire CD via/contact generation. wire length A. Metal Generation track 3 The layout generation tool generates metal layers cell by cell where metal shape distribution and placement are Fig. 2 Visualization of terminologies in metal generation controlled by a set of design constraints as listed below. constraints. - wire_cd (w). The critical dimension of metal wire Algorithm 1 On Track Wire Generation shapes, defined by wire width. - track_pitch (p). The distance between adjacent 1: function DrawWire(w, t 1 , t 2 , t g , l 1 , l 2 , x t , x o , y o ) wire tracks. 2: Initialize parameters x,y 0; ← - min_t2t (t 1 ). The minimum line-end to line-end dis- 3: while x<x t do tance in each wire track. 4: l rand(l 1 ,max(l 2 ,x t x)); ← − - max_t2t (t 2 ). The maximum line-end to line-end 5: x ll ← x + x o ,y ll ← y + y o ,x ur ← x + l + distance in each wire track. x o ,y ur y+w+y o ; ← - min_length (l 1 ). The minimum length of a single 6: Drawarectangledefinedbyx ll ,y ll ,x ur andy ur ; wire shape along