as anomalies and have to be evaluated manually or excluded automatically. To mitigate the risk of anchoring bias in the definition phase discussing the requirements with a domain expert is advised [29]. Documentation of the data requirements could be done in the form of a schema [42,43]. Data verification: The initial data, added data but also the production data has to be checked according to the requirements (see section 3.6). In cases where the requirements are not met, the data will be discarded and stored for further manual analysis. This helps to reducetheriskofdecreasingtheperformanceoftheMLapplicationthroughaddinglow-quality data and helps to detect varying data distributions or unstable inputs. To mitigate the risk of insufficientrepresentationofextremecases,itisbestpracticetousedataexplorationtechniques to investigate the sample distribution. 3.1.6. Review of Output Documents TheBusiness&DataUnderstandingphasedeliversthescopeforthedevelopment(section 3.1.3), the success criteria (section 3.1.2) of a ML application and a data quality verification report (section 3.1.5) to approve the feasibility of the project. The output documents need to be reviewed to rank the risks and define the next tasks. If certain quality criteria are not met, re-iterations of previous tasks are possible. 3.2. Data Preparation Buildingontheexperiencefromtheprecedingdataunderstandingphase,datapreparation serves the purpose of producing a data set for the subsequent modeling phase. However, data preparation is not a static phase and backtracking circles from later phases are necessary if, for example, the modeling phase or the deployment phase reveal erroneous data. To path the way towards ML lifecycle in a later phase, methods for data preparation that are suitable for automation as demonstrated by Fischer et al. [8] are preferable. 3.2.1. Select Data Feature selection: Selecting a good data representation based on the available measurements is one of the challenges to assure the quality of the ML application. It is best practice to discard underutilized features as they provide little to none modeling benefit but offer possible loopholes for errors i.e. instability of the feature during the operation of the ML application [30]. In addition, the more features are selected the more samples are necessary. Intuitively an exponentially increasing number of samples for an increasing number of features is required to prevent the data from becoming sparse in the feature space. This is termed as the curse of dimensionality [44,45]. Thus, it is best practice to select just necessary features. A checklist for the feature selection task is given in [46]. Note that data often forms a manifold of lower dimensions in the feature space and models have to learn this respectively [47]. Feature 8of20 selection methods can be separated into three categories: 1) filter methods select features from data without considering the model, 2) wrapper methods use a learning model to evaluate the significance of the features and 3) embedded methods combines the feature selection and the classifier construction steps. A detailed explanation and in-depth analysis on the feature selection problem are given in [48–51]. Feature selection could carry the risk of selection bias but could be reduced when the feature selection is performed within the cross-validation of the model (see section 3.3) to account for all possible combinations [52]. However, the selection of the features should not be relied purely on the validation and test error but should be analyzed by a domain expert as potential biases might occur due to spurious correlation in the data. Lapuschkin et al. [53,54] showed that classifiers could exploit spurious correlations, here the copyright tag on the horse class, to obtain a remarkable test performanceand,thus,fakesafalsesenseofgeneralization. Insuchcases,explanationmethods [55] could be used to highlight the significance of features (see section 3.4) and analyzed from a human’s perspective. Data selection: Discarding samples should be well documented and strictly based on objective quality criteria. However, certain samples might not satisfy the necessary quality i.e. doesn’t satisfy the requirements defined in section 3.1.5 and are not plausible and, thus, should be removed from the data set. Unbalanced Classes: Incasesofunbalancedclasses, wherethenumberofsamplesperclass isskewed,differentsamplingstrategiescouldimprovetheresults. Over-samplingoftheminority class and/or under-sampling of the majority class [56–59] have been used. Over-sampling increases the importance of the minority class but could result in overfitting on the minority class. Under-Samplingbyremovingdatapointsfromthemajorityclasshastobedonecarefully to keep the characteristics of the data and reduce the chance of introducing biases. However, removing points close to the decision boundary or multiple data points from the same cluster should be avoided. Comparing the results of different sampling techniques’ reduces the risk of introducing bias to the model. 3.2.2. Clean Data Noise reduction: The gathered data often includes, besides the predictive signal, noise and unwanted signals from other sources. Signal processing filters could be used to remove the irrelevant signals from the data and improve the signal-to-noise ratio [60,61]. However, filtering the data should be documented and evaluated because of the risk that an erroneous filter could remove important parts of the signal in the data. Data imputation: To get a complete data set, missing, NAN and special values could be imputed with a model