of ML applications and proposes quality assurance methodology that became industry best practice. Our contributions focus primarily on the technical tasks needed to produce evidence that every step in the development process is of sufficient quality to warrant the adoption into business processes. The following second section describes the related work and ongoing research in the development of process models for machine learning applications. In the third chapter, the tasks and quality assurance methodology are introduced for each process phase. Finally, a conclusion and an outlook are given in the fourth chapter. 2. Related Work CRISP-DM defines a reference framework for carrying out data mining projects and sets out activities to be performed to complete a product or service. The activities are organized in six phases (see table 1). The successful completion of a phase initiates the execution of the subsequent activity. CRISP-DM includes iterations of revisiting previous steps until success or completion criteria are met. It can be therefore characterized as a waterfall life cycle with backtracking[20]. Duringthedevelopmentofapplications,processesandtaskstobeperformed can be derived from the standardized process model. Methodology instantiates these tasks, i.e. stipulates how to do a task (or how it should be done). For each activity, CRISP-DM defines a set of (generic) tasks that are stable and general. Hereby, tasks are called stable when they are designed to keep the process model up to date with new modeling techniques to come and general when they are intended to cover many possible project scenarios. CRISP-DM has been specialized, e.g., to incorporate temporal data mining (CRISP-TDM; [24]), null-hypothesis driven confirmatory data mining (CRISP-DM0; 3of20 A 0 101 extract patterns & information knowledge data B data mining process Training data output machine (labels) learning model machine learning Inference application inferred data output model Figure 1. Difference between data mining processes and machine learning applications. A) In the data mining process information is directly extracted from data to find pattern und gain knowledge. B) A machine learning application consists of two steps. A machine learning model on data is trained and applied to perform inference on new data. Note that the model itself can be studied to gain insight within a knowledge discovery process. [25]),evidencemining(CRISP-EM;[26]),anddatamininginthehealthcare(CRISP-MED-DM; [27]). Complementary to CRISP-DM, process models for ML applications have been proposed [28,29](seeTable1). Amershiet al.[28]conductedaninternalstudyatMicrosoftonchallenges of ML projects and derived a process model with nine different phases. However, their process model lacks quality assurance methodology and does not cover the business needs. Breck et al. [29]proposed28specificteststoquantifyissuesintheMLpipelinetoreducethetechnicaldebt [30] of ML applications. These tests estimate the production readiness of a ML application, i.e., the quality of the application in our context. However, their tests do not completely cover all project phases, e.g., excluding the business understanding activity. Practical experiences reveal that business understanding is a necessary first step that defines the success criteria and the feasibility for the subsequent tasks. Without considering the business needs, the ML objectives might be defined orthogonal to the business objectives and causes to spend a great deal of effort producing the rights answers to the wrong questions. To our knowledge, Marbán et al. [20] were the first to consider quality in the context of process models for data mining. Borrowing ideas from software development, their work suggests creating traceability, test procedures, and test data for challenging the product’s fitness for its purpose during the evaluation phase. We address these issues by devising a process model for the development of practical ML applications. In addition, we will provide a curated list of references for an in-depth analysis on the specific tasks. 3. Quality Assurance in Machine Learning Projects WeproposeaprocessmodelthatwecallCRoss-IndustryStandardProcessmodelforthe development of Machine Learning applications with Quality assurance methodology (CRISPML(Q)) to highlight its compatibility to CRISP-DM. It is designed for the development of machine applications i.e. application scenarios where a ML model is deployed and maintained as part of a product or service (see fig. 1). 4of20 Asafirstcontribution,quality assurance methodology isintroducedineachphaseandtask of the process model (see fig. 2). The quality methodology serves to mitigate risks that affect thesuccessandefficiencyofthemachinelearningapplication. Asasecondcontribution,CRISPML(Q) covers a monitoring and maintenance phase to address risks of model degradation in a changing environment. This extends the scope of the process model as compared to CRISP-DM, see Table 1. Moreover, business and data understanding are merged into a single phase because industry practice has taught us that these two activities, which are separate in CRISP-DM, are strongly intertwined, since business objectives can be derived or changed based on available data (see Table 1). A similar approach has been outlined in the W-Model [31]. CRISP-ML(Q) CRISP-DM Amershi et al. [28] Breck et al. [29] Business & Business Un- Require- - Data derstanding ments Understanding Data Under- Collection standing Data Cleaning Data Data Labeling Preparation Preparation FeatureEngi- Infraneering structure Modeling Modeling Training Model Evaluation Evaluation Evaluation - Deployment Deployment Deployment - Monitoring & - Monitoring Monitoring Maintenance