We suggest to evaluate the models on at least six complementary properties (see fig. 3). Besides a performance metric, soft measures such as robustness, explainability, scalability, resource demand and model complexity have to be evaluated (see table 2). The measures can be weighted differently depending on the application. In practical application, explainability [34,77,78] or robustness might be valued more than accuracy. Additionally, the model’s fairness [38,39] or trust might have to be assessed and mitigated. Performance The model’s performance on unseen data. The model’s resiliency to inconsistent inputs and to Robustness failures in the execution environment. The model’s ability to scale to high data volume in Scalability the production system. Explainability The model’s direct or post-hoc explainability. Model Com- The model’s capacity should suit the data complexplexity ity. Resource DeThe model’s resource demand for deployment. mand Table 2: Quality measure of machine learning models Model Selection: There are plenty of ML models and introductory books on classical methods [45,79] and Deep Learning [72] can be used to compare and understand their characteristics. The model selection depends on the data and has to be tailored to the problem. There is no such model that performs the best on all problem classes (No Free Lunch Theorem for ML [80]). It is best practice to start with models of lower capacity, which can serve as baseline, and gradually increase the capacity. Validating each step assures its benefit and avoid unnecessary complexity of the model. Incorporatedomainknowledge: Inpractice,aspecializedmodelforaspecifictaskperforms better than a general model for all possible tasks. However, adapting the model to a specific problem involves the risk ofincorporatingfalse assumption andcould reduce thesolution space to a non-optimal subset. Therefore, it is best practice to validate the incorporated domain knowledge in isolation against a baseline. Adding domain knowledge should always increase the quality of the model, otherwise, it should be removed to avoid false bias. Model training: The trained model depends on the learning problem and as such are tightly coupled. The learning problem contains an objective, optimizer, regularization and cross-validation [45,72]. The objective of the learning problem depends on the application. Different applications value different aspects and have to be tweaked in alignment with the business success criteria. The objective is a proxy to evaluate the performance of the model. The optimizer defines the learning strategy and how to adapt the parameters of the model to improve the objective. Regularization which can be incorporated in the objective, optimizer and in the model itself is needed to reduce the risk of overfitting and can help to find unique solutions. Cross-validation is performed for feature selection, to optimize the hyper-parameters of the model and to test its generalization property to unseen data [81]. Cross-validation 11of20 [45] is based on a splitting of historical data in training, validation and testing data, where the latter is used as a proxy for the target environment [82]. Frameworks such as Auto-ML [83,84] or Neural Architecture Search [85] enables to partly automatize the hyper-parameters optimization and the architecture search. Using unlabeled data and pre-trained models: Labeling data could be very expensive and might limit the available data set size. Unlabeled data might be exploited in the training process, e.g. by performing unsupervised pre-training [86,87] and semi-supervised learning algorithms [88,89]. Complementary, transfer learning could be used to pre-train the network on a proxy data set (e.g. from simulations) that resembles the original data to extract common features [90]. Model Compression: Compression or pruning methods could be used to obtain a more compactmodel. Inkernelmethodslowrankapproximationsofthekernelmatrixisanessential tool to tackle large scale learning problems [91,92]. Neural Networks use a different approach [93] by either pruning the network weights [94] or applying a compression scheme on the network weights [95]. Ensemble methods: Ensemble methods train multiple models to perform the decision based on the aggregate decisions of the individual models. The models could be of different types or multiple instantiations of one type. This results in a more fault-tolerant system as the error of one model could be absorbed by the other models. Boosting, Bagging or Mixture of Experts are mature techniques to aggregate the decision of multiple models [96–98]. In addition, ensemble models are used to compute uncertainty estimates and can highlight areas of low confidence [99,100]. 3.3.1. Assure reproducibility A major principle of scientific methods and the characteristics of robust ML applications is reproducibility. However, ML models are difficult to reproduce due to the mostly non-convex and stochastic training procedures and randomized data splits. It has been proposed to distinguish reproducibility on two different levels. First, one has to assure that the method itself is reproducible and secondly its results [101]. Method reproducibility: This task aims at reproducing the model from an extensive descriptionorsharingoftheusedalgorithm,dataset,hyper-parametersandruntimeenvironment (e.g. software versions, hardware and random seeds [102]). The algorithm should be described in detail i.e. with (pseudo) code and on the