3.3.1. Assure reproducibility A major principle of scientific methods and the characteristics of robust ML applications is reproducibility. However, ML models are difficult to reproduce due to the mostly non-convex and stochastic training procedures and randomized data splits. It has been proposed to distinguish reproducibility on two different levels. First, one has to assure that the method itself is reproducible and secondly its results [101]. Method reproducibility: This task aims at reproducing the model from an extensive descriptionorsharingoftheusedalgorithm,dataset,hyper-parametersandruntimeenvironment (e.g. software versions, hardware and random seeds [102]). The algorithm should be described in detail i.e. with (pseudo) code and on the meta-level including the assumptions. Result reproducibility: It is best practice to validate the mean performance and assess the variance of the model on different random seeds [103,104]. Reporting only the top performance of the model [103,105] is common but dubious practice. Large performance variances indicate the sensitivity of the algorithm and question the robustness of the model. Experimental Documentation: Keeping track of the changed model’s performance and its causes by precedent model modifications allows model comprehension by addressing which modificationswerebeneficialandimprovetheoverallmodelquality. Thedocumentationshould containthelistedpropertiesinthemethod reproducibility task. Tool-basedapproachonversion control and meta-data handling while experimenting on ML models and hyper-parameters exist [106]. 3.4. Evaluation Validate performance: A risk occurs when information from a test set leak into the validation or even training set. Hence, it is best practice to hold back an additional test set, which is disjoint from the validation and training set, stored only for a final evaluation and never shipped to any partner to be able to measure the performance metrics (blind-test). The test set should be assembled and curated with caution and ideally by a team of experts that 12of20 are capable to analyze the correctness and ability to represent real cases. In general, the test set should cover the whole input distribution and consider all invariances, e.g. transformations of the input that do not change the label, in the data. Another major risk is that the test set cannot cover all possible inputs due to the large input dimensionality or rare corner cases, i.e. inputs with low probability of occuring [107–109]. Extensive testing reduces this risk [82]. It is recommendedtoseparatetheteamsandtheprocedurescollectingthetrainingandthetestdata to erase dependencies and avoid methodology dependence. Additionally, it is recommended to perform a sliced performance analysis to highlight weak performance on certain classes or time slices. Determine robustness: AmajorriskoccursifMLapplicationsarenotrobusttoperturbed, e.g. noisy or wrong, or even designed adversarial input data as show by Chan-Hon-Tong [110]. This requires methods to statistically estimate the model’s local and global robustness. One approach is adding different kinds of noisy or falsified input to the data or varying the hyperparameters to characterize the model’s generalization ability. Formal verification approaches [32] and robustness validation methods using cross-validation techniques on historical data [82] exist. The model’s robustness should match the quality claims made in table 2. Increase explainability for ML practitioner & end user: Explainability of a model helps to find errors and allows strategies, e.g. by enriching the data set, to improve the overall performance [111]. In practice, inherently interpretable models are not necessary inferior to complex models in case of structured input data with meaningful features [77]. Thrun et al. [112]showtheadvantagesoftheglassboxmodelExplainable Boosting Machine,thatvisualizes feature-wise contributions to the predictions at comparable performance to common models. To achieve explainability and gain a deeper understanding of what a model has already learned and to avoid spurious correlations [54], it is best practice to carefully observe the features which impact the model’s prediction the most and check whether they are plausible from a domainexperts’ pointofview[113–115]. Moreover, case studieshaveshownthat explainability helps to increase trust and users’ acceptance [116] and could guide humans in ML assisted decisions [78]. Unified frameworks to explore model explainabilty are available (e.g. [117,118]). Compare results with defined success criteria: Finally, domain and ML experts have to decide if the model can be deployed. Therefore, it is best practice to document the results of the evaluation phase and compare them to the business and ML success criteria defined in section 3.1.2. If the success criteria are not met, one might backtrack to earlier phases (modelingorevendatapreparation)orstoptheproject. Identifiedlimitationsofrobustnessand explainability during evaluation might require an update of the risk assessment (e.g. Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA)) and might also lead to backtracking to the modeling phase or stopping the project. 3.5. Deployment ThedeploymentphaseofaMLmodelischaracterizedbyitspracticaluseinthedesignated field of application. Define inference hardware: Choose the hardware based on the requirements defined in section3.1.3oralignwithanexistinghardware. Whilecloudservicesofferscalablecomputation resources, embedded system have hard constraints. ML specific options are e.g. to optimize towardsthetargethardware[119]regardingCPUandGPUavailability,tooptimizetowardsthe target operation system (demonstrated for Android and iOS by Sehgal and Kehtarnavaz [120]) or to optimize the ML workload for a specific platform [121]. Monitoring and maintenance (see section 3.6) have to be considered in the overall architecture. Model evaluation under production condition: The risk persists that the production data does not resemble the