merged into a single phase because industry practice has taught us that these two activities, which are separate in CRISP-DM, are strongly intertwined, since business objectives can be derived or changed based on available data (see Table 1). A similar approach has been outlined in the W-Model [31]. CRISP-ML(Q) CRISP-DM Amershi et al. [28] Breck et al. [29] Business & Business Un- Require- - Data derstanding ments Understanding Data Under- Collection standing Data Cleaning Data Data Labeling Preparation Preparation FeatureEngi- Infraneering structure Modeling Modeling Training Model Evaluation Evaluation Evaluation - Deployment Deployment Deployment - Monitoring & - Monitoring Monitoring Maintenance Table 1: Comparing different process models for DM and ML projects. Business and data understanding phases are merged in CRISP-ML(Q) and a separate maintenance phase is introduced in comparison to CRISP-DM. Amershi et al. [28] and Breck et al. [29] lack the business understanding phase. Deep red color highlight data and petrol blue color model related phases. In what follows, we describe selected tasks from CRISP-ML(Q) and propose quality assurance methodology to determine whether these tasks were performed according to current standardsfromindustrybestpracticeandacademicliterature, whichhaveproventobegeneral and stable and are suitable to mitigate the task specific risks. The selection reflects tasks and methods that we consider the most important. The flow chart in fig. 2 explains the CRISP-ML(Q) approach for quality assurance. Requirements and constraints define the objectives of a generic phase, instantiate specific steps and tasks and identify risks, that can affect the efficiency and success of the ML application. If risks aren’t feasible, appropriate quality assurance methods are chosen to mitigate risks in an iterative approach using guidelines and checklists. While general risk management has diverse disciplines [19], this approach focuses on risks that affect the efficiency and success of the ML application and require technical tasks for risk mitigation. Note that the processes and quality measures in this document are not designed for safety-critical systems. Safety-critical systems might require different or additional processes and quality measures. 5of20 Start CRISP-ML(Q) phase Definerequirementsandconstraints Instantiatestepandtask Identifyrisks Mitigaterisks risks no Choose feasable quality ? assurance yes method no Phase yes Start next finished phase ? Figure 2. Illustration of the CRISP-ML(Q) approach for quality assurance. The flow chart shows the instantiation of one specific tasks in a development phase, and the dedicated steps to identify and mitigate risks. 3.1. Business and Data Understanding The initial phase is concerned with tasks to define the business objectives and translate it to ML objectives, to collect and verify the data quality and to finaly assess the project feasibility. 3.1.1. Define the Scope of the ML Application CRISP-DM names the data scientist responsible to define the scope of the project. However,indailybusiness,theseparationofdomainexpertsanddatascientistscarriestherisk, that the application will not satisfy the business needs. Moreover, the availability of training samples will to a large extent influence the feasibility of the data-based application [28]. It is, therefore, best practice to merge the requirements of the business unit with ML requirements while keeping in mind data related constraints in a joint step. 3.1.2. Success Criteria We propose to measure the success criteria of a ML project on three different levels: the businesssuccesscriteria,theMLsuccesscriteriaandtheeconomicsuccesscriteria. Accordingto the IEEE standard for developing software life cycle processes [19], the requirement measurable is one of the essential principles of quality assurance methodology. In addition, each success criterion has to be defined in alignment to each other and with respect to the overall system requirements [32] to prevent contradictory objectives. Business Success Criteria: Define the purpose and the success criteria of the ML application from a business point of view. For example, if an ML application is planned for a quality check in production and is supposed to outperform the current manual failure rate of 3%, the business success criterion could be derived as e.g. "failure rate less than 3%". ML Success Criteria: Translate the business objective into ML success criteria (see table 2). Itisadvisedtodefineaminimumacceptablelevelofperformancetomeetthebusinessgoals (e.g. for a Minimal Viable Product (MVP)) In the mentioned example, the minimal success 6of20 criterion is defined as "accuracy greater 97%", but data scientists might optimize further, for example, the true-positive rate to miss items with quality issues. Economic Success Criteria: It is best practice to add an economic success criterion in the form of a Key Performance Indicator (KPI) to the project. A KPI is an economical measure for the relevance of the ML application. In the mentioned example, a KPI can be defined as "cost savings with automated quality check per part". 3.1.3. Feasibility Checking the feasibility before setting up the project is considered best practice for the overall success of the ML approach [33] and can minimize the risk of premature failures due to false expectations. A feasibility test of the ML application should assess the situation and whether further development should be pursued. It is crucial, that the assessment includes the