the software or hardware of the system can cause a shift in the environment. For example, the units of a signal got changed during an update. Without notifications, the model would use this scaled input to infer false predictions. 14of20 After the underlying problem is known, we can formulate the necessary methods to circumvent stale models and assure the quality. We propose two sequential tasks in the maintenance phase to assure or improve the quality of the model. In the monitor task, the staleness of the model is evaluated and returns whether the model has to be updated or not. Afterward, the model is updated and evaluated to gauge whether the update was successful. Monitor: Baylor et al.[76] proposes to monitor all input signals and notify when an update has occurred. Therefore, statistics of the incoming data and the predicted labels can be compared to the statistics of the training data. Complementary, the schema defined in section 3.1.5 can be used to validate the correctness of the incoming data. Inputs that do not satisfy the schema can be treated as anomalies and denied by the model [76]. Libraries exist to help implementing an automatic data validation system [43]. If the labels of the incoming data are known e.g. in forecasting tasks, the performance of the model can be directly monitored and recorded. An equal approach can be applied to the outputs of the model that underlie a certain distribution if environment conditions are stable and can give an estimate on the number of actions performed when interacting with an environment [30]. The monitoring phase also includes a comparison of the performance with the defined success criteria. Based on the monitoring results, it can be decided upon whether the model should be updated e.g. if input signals change significantly, the number of anomalies reaches a certain threshold or the performance has reached a lower bound. The decision whether the model has to be updatedshouldconsiderthecostsofupdatingthemodelandthecostsresultingfromerroneous predictions due to stale models. Update: In the updating step, new data is collected to re-train the model under the changed data distribution. Consider that new data has to be labeled which could be very expensive. Instead of training a completely new model from scratch, it is advised to fine-tune the existing model to new data. It might be necessary to perform some of the modeling steps in section 3.3 to cope with the changing data distribution. Every update step has to undergo a new evaluation (section 3.4) before it can be deployed. The performance of the updated model should be compared against the previous versions and could give insights on the time scale of model degradation. It should be noted, that ML systems might influence their own behavior during updates due to direct, e.g. by influencing its future training data selection, or indirect, e.g. via interaction through the world, feedback loops [30]. The risk of positive feedback loops causing system instability has to be addressed e.g. by not only monitoring but limiting the actions of the model. In addition, as part of the deployment strategy, a module is needed that tracks the application usage and performance and handles several deployment strategies like A/B testing [76,126]. The module can e.g. be set up in form of a microservice [23] or a directed graph [128]. To reduce the risk of serving erroneous models, an automatic or human controlled fallback to a previous model needs to be implemented. The automation of the update strategy can be boosted up to a continuous training and continuous deployment of the ML application [76] while covering the defined quality assurance methods. 4. Discussion We have introduced CRISP-ML(Q), a process model for ML applications with quality assurance methodology, that helps organizations to increase efficiency and the success rate in their ML projects. It guides ML practitioners through the entire ML development life-cycle, steppingintothephasesandtasksoftheiterativeprocessincludingmaintenanceandmonitoring. Whenevertasksspecificriskscanbeidentified,weprovidequality-orientedmethodstomitigate those risks. All methods provided are considered best practices in ML projects in industry and academia. 15of20 Our survey is indicative of the existence of specialist literature, but its contributions are not covered in ML textbooks and are not part of the academic curriculum. Hence, novices to industry practice often lack a profound state-of-the-art knowledge to mitigate risks and ensure project success. Stressing quality assurance methodology is particularly important because many ML practitioners focus solely on improving the predictive performance. 5. Conclusions An important future step on the basis of our and related work is the standardization of a process model. This would contribute to more successful ML projects and thus would have a major impact on the ML community [14]. Notethattheprocessandqualitymeasuresinthisworkarenotdesignedforsafety-relevant systems. Their study and and the discussion of legal constrains are left to future work. We encourage industry from automotive and other domains to implement CRISP-ML(Q) in their machine learning applications and contribute their knowledge to establish a