a Key Performance Indicator (KPI) to the project. A KPI is an economical measure for the relevance of the ML application. In the mentioned example, a KPI can be defined as "cost savings with automated quality check per part". 3.1.3. Feasibility Checking the feasibility before setting up the project is considered best practice for the overall success of the ML approach [33] and can minimize the risk of premature failures due to false expectations. A feasibility test of the ML application should assess the situation and whether further development should be pursued. It is crucial, that the assessment includes the availability, size and quality of the training sample set. In practice, a major source of project delays is the lack of data availability (see section 3.1.4). A small sample size carries the risk of low performance on out-of-sample data [34]. The risk might be mitigated by e.g. adding domain knowledge or increasing data quality. However, if the sample size is not sufficient the ML project should be terminated or put on hold at this stage. Applicability of ML technology: Literature search for either similar applications on a similar domain or similar methodological approaches on a different domain could assess the applicability of the ML technology. It is common to demonstrate the feasibility of a ML application with a proof of concept (PoC) when the ML algorithm is used for the first time in a specific domain. If a PoC already exists, setting up a software project that focuses on the deployment directly is more efficient, e.g. in case of yet another price estimation of used cars [35]. Legal constraints: It is beyond the scope of this paper to discuss legal issues but they are essential for any business application [36,37]. Legal constraints are frequently augmented by ethical and social considerations like fairness and trust [38–40]. Requirements on the application: The success criteria that have been defined in section 3.1.2 have to be augmented with requirements that arise from running the application in the target domain or if not accessible an assumed target domain [32]. The requirements include robustness, scalability, explainability and resource demand and are used for the development and verification in later phases (see section 3.3). The challenge during the development is to optimize the success criteria while not violating the requirements and constraints. 3.1.4. Data Collection Costs and time is needed to collect a sufficient amount of consistent data by preparing and merging data from different sources and different formats (see section 3.2). A ML project might be delayed until the data is collected or could even be stopped if the collection of data of sufficient quality (see section 3.1.5) is not feasible. Data version control: Collecting data is not a static task but rather an iterative task. Modification on the data set (see section 3.2) should be documented to mitigate the risk of obtainingirreproducibleorwrongresults. Versioncontrolonthedataisoneoftheessentialtools to assure reproducibility and quality as it allows to track errors and unfavorable modifications during the development. 3.1.5. Data Quality Verification ThefollowingthreetasksexaminewhetherthebusinessandMLobjectivescanbeachieved with the given quality of the available data. A ML project is doomed to fail if the data quality is poor. The lack of a certain data quality will trigger the previous data collection task (see section 3.1.4). 7of20 Data description: The data description forms the basis for the data quality verification. A description and an exploration of the data is performed to gain insight about the underlying data generation process. The data should be described on a meta-level and by their statistical properties. Furthermore, a technically well funded visualization of the data should help to understand the data generating process [41]. Information about format, units and description of the input signals is expanded by domain knowledge. Data requirements: The data requirements can be defined either on the meta-level or directlyinthedataandshouldstatetheexpectedconditionsofthedata, i.e. whetheracertain sample is plausible. The requirements can be, e.g., the expected feature values (a range for continuous features or a list for discrete features), the format of the data and the maximum number of missing values. The bounds of the requirements has to be defined carefully to include all possible real world values but discard non-plausible data. Data that does not satisfy the expected conditions could be treated as anomalies and have to be evaluated manually or excluded automatically. To mitigate the risk of anchoring bias in the definition phase discussing the requirements with a domain expert is advised [29]. Documentation of the data requirements could be done in the form of a schema [42,43]. Data verification: The initial data, added data but also the production data has to be checked according to the requirements (see section 3.6). In cases where the requirements are not met, the data will be discarded and stored for further manual analysis. This helps to reducetheriskofdecreasingtheperformanceoftheMLapplicationthroughaddinglow-quality data and helps to detect varying data