of different sampling techniques’ reduces the risk of introducing bias to the model. 3.2.2. Clean Data Noise reduction: The gathered data often includes, besides the predictive signal, noise and unwanted signals from other sources. Signal processing filters could be used to remove the irrelevant signals from the data and improve the signal-to-noise ratio [60,61]. However, filtering the data should be documented and evaluated because of the risk that an erroneous filter could remove important parts of the signal in the data. Data imputation: To get a complete data set, missing, NAN and special values could be imputed with a model readable value. Depending on the data and ML task the values are imputed by mean or median values, interpolated, replaced by a special value symbol [62] (as the pattern of the values could be informative), substituted by model predictions [63], matrix factorization [64] or multiple imputations [65–67] or imputed based on a convex optimization problem [68]. To reduce the risk of introducing substitution artifacts, the performance of the model should be compared between different imputation techniques. 3.2.3. Construct Data Feature engineering: New features could be derived from existing ones based on domain knowledge. Thiscouldbe,forexample,thetransformationofthefeaturesfromthetimedomain into the frequency domain, discretization of continuous features into bins or augmenting the featureswithadditionalfeaturesbasedontheexistingones. Inaddition,thereareseveralgeneric feature construction methods, such as clustering [69], dimensional reduction methods such as Kernel-PCA [70] or auto-encoders [71]. Nominal features and labels should be transformed into a one-hot encoding while ordinal features and labels are transformed into numerical 9of20 values. However, the engineered features should be compared against a baseline to assess the utility of the feature. Underutilized features should be removed. Models that construct the feature representation as part of the learning process, e.g. neural networks, avoid the feature engineering steps [72]. Data augmentation: Data augmentation utilizes known invariances in the data to perform a label preserving transformation to construct new data. The transformations could either be performedinthefeaturespace[57]orinputspace,suchasapplyingrotation,elasticdeformation or Gaussian noise to an image [73]. Data could also be augmented on a meta-level, such as switching the scenery from a sunny day to a rainy day. This expands the data set with additional samples and allows the model to capture those invariances. 3.2.4. Standardize Data File format: Some ML tools require specific variable or input types (data syntax). Indeed in practice, the comma separated values (CSV) format is the most generic standard (RFC 4180). ISO 8000 recommends the use of SI units according to the International System of Quantities. Defining a fix set of standards and units, helps to avoid the risks of errors in the merging process and further in detecting erroneous data (see section 3.1.5). Normalization: Without proper normalization, the features could be defined on different scales and might lead to strong bias to features on larger scales. In addition, normalized features lead to faster convergence rates in neural networks than without [74,75]. Note that the normalization, applied to the training set has to be applied also to the test set using the same normalization parameters. 3.3. Modeling The choice of modeling techniques depends on the ML and the business objectives, the data and the boundary conditions of the project the ML application is contributing to. The requirements and constraints that have been defined in section 3.1 are used as inputs to guide the model selection to a subset of appropriate models. The goal of the modeling phase is to craft one or multiple models that satisfy the given constraints and requirements. An outline of the modeling phase is depicted in fig. 3. Universe of all models Performance Robustness Subset of appropriate Ranking models Model Resource Scalability Demand Model Explainability Complexity Figure 3. An outline of the modeling phase. Only a subset of models fulfill the constraints and requirements defined in section 3.1 and section 3.1.3 and have to be evaluated using quality measures (see table 2) . Literature research on similar problems: It is best practice to screen the literature (e.g. publications, patents, internal reports) for a comprehensive overview on similar ML tasks, 10of20 since ML has become an established tool for a wide number of applications. New models can be based on published insights and previous results can serve as performance baselines. Definequalitymeasuresofthemodel: Themodelingstrategyhastohavemultipleobjectives in mind [76]. We suggest to evaluate the models on at least six complementary properties (see fig. 3). Besides a performance metric, soft measures such as robustness, explainability, scalability, resource demand and model complexity have to be evaluated (see table 2). The measures can be weighted differently depending on the application. In practical application, explainability [34,77,78] or robustness might be valued more than accuracy. Additionally, the model’s fairness [38,39] or trust might have to be assessed and mitigated. Performance The model’s performance on unseen data. The model’s resiliency to inconsistent inputs and to Robustness failures in the execution environment. The model’s ability to