also lead to backtracking to the modeling phase or stopping the project. 3.5. Deployment ThedeploymentphaseofaMLmodelischaracterizedbyitspracticaluseinthedesignated field of application. Define inference hardware: Choose the hardware based on the requirements defined in section3.1.3oralignwithanexistinghardware. Whilecloudservicesofferscalablecomputation resources, embedded system have hard constraints. ML specific options are e.g. to optimize towardsthetargethardware[119]regardingCPUandGPUavailability,tooptimizetowardsthe target operation system (demonstrated for Android and iOS by Sehgal and Kehtarnavaz [120]) or to optimize the ML workload for a specific platform [121]. Monitoring and maintenance (see section 3.6) have to be considered in the overall architecture. Model evaluation under production condition: The risk persists that the production data does not resemble the training data. Previous assumptions on the training data might not 13of20 hold in production and the hardware that gathered the data might differ. Therefore it is best practice to evaluate the performance of the model under incrementally increasing production conditions by iteratively running the tasks in section 3.4. On each incremental step, the model hastobecalibratedtothedeployedhardwareandthetestenvironment. Thisallowsidentifying wrongassumptionsonthedeployedenvironmentandthecausesofmodeldegradation. Domain adaptation techniques can be applied [122,123] to enhance the generalization ability of the model. This step will also give a first indication whether the business and economic success criteria, which was defined in section 3.1.2, could be met. Assure user acceptance and usability: Even after passing all evaluation steps, there might be the risk that the user acceptance and the usability of the model is underwhelming. The model might be incomprehensible and or does not cover corner cases. It is best practice to build a prototype and run an field test with end users [82]. Examine the acceptance, usage rate and the user experience. A user guide and disclaimer shall be provided to the end users to explain the system’s functionality and limits. Minimize the risks of unforeseen errors: The risks of unforeseen errors and outage times could cause system shutdowns and a temporary suspension of services. This could lead to user complaints and the declining of user numbers and could reduce the revenue. A fall-back plan, that is activated in case of e.g. erroneous model updates or detected bugs, can help to tackle the problem. Options are to roll back to a previous version, a pre-defined baseline or a rule-based system. A second option to counteract unforeseen errors is to implement software safety cages that control and limit the outputs of the ML application [124] or even learn safe regions in the state space [125]. Deployment strategy: Even though the model is evaluated rigorously during each previous step, there is the risk that errors might be undetected through the process. Before rolling out a model, it is best practice to setup an e.g. incremental deployment strategy that includes a pipeline for models and data [76,126]. When cloud architectures are used, strategies can often be aligned on general deployment strategies for cloud software applications [127]. The impact of such erroneous deployments and the cost of fixing errors should be minimized. 3.6. Monitoring and Maintenance Withtheexpansionfromknowledgediscoverytodata-drivenapplicationstoinferreal-time decisions,MLmodelsareusedoveralongperiodandhavealifecyclewhichhastobemanaged. The risk of not maintaining the model is the degradation of the performance over time which leads to false predictions and could cause errors in subsequent systems. The main reason for a model to become impaired over time is rooted in the violation of the assumption that the training data and the input data for inference come from the same distribution. The causes of the violations are: • Non-stationary data distribution: Data distributions change over time and result in a stale training set and, thus, the characteristics of the data distribution are represented incorrectly by the training data. Either a shift in the features and/or in the labels are possible. This degrades the performance of the model over time. The frequency of the changes depends on the domain. Data of the stock market are very volatile whereas the visual properties of elephants won’t change much over the next years. • Degradation of hardware: The hardware that the model is deployed on and the sensor hardware will age over time. Wear parts in a system will age and friction characteristics of the system might change. Sensors get noisier or fail over time. This will shift the domain of the system and has to be adapted by the model or by retraining it. • System updates: Updates on the software or hardware of the system can cause a shift in the environment. For example, the units of a signal got changed during an update. Without notifications, the model would use this scaled input to infer false predictions. 14of20 After the underlying problem is known, we can formulate the necessary methods to circumvent stale models and assure the quality. We propose two sequential tasks in the maintenance phase to assure or improve the quality of the model. In the monitor task, the staleness of the model is evaluated and returns whether the model has to be updated or not.