training data is 30-100 times the number of model parameters. Availability of No. configuration Model Interpretability Black box, as correlation between input and output is masked. No attempt was made to make the model transparent. Output Regression, i.e. probability of residues being disordered. Execution time ESpritzS ca. 1 sec / protein, ESpritzP ca. 1,500 sec / protein on a single Intel Xeon core. Availability of Web server, URL: http://protein.bio.unipd.it/espritz/ software Linux executable, URL: http://protein.bio.unipd.it/download/. Bespoke license free for academic use. Evaluation Evaluation method Independent datasets. Performance Accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, selectivity, F-measure, MCC, AUC are measures standard. S = Sens + Spec -1. ​w ​ Comparison Disopred, MULTICOM, DisEMBL, IUpred, PONDR-FIT, Spritz, CSpritz. Wide range of popular predictors used for comparison. Confidence Bootstrapping was used to estimate statistical significance as in CASP-8 (Noivirt-Brik et al, Proteins 2009). 80% of target proteins were randomly selected 1000 times, and the standard error of the scores was 19 calculated (i.e. 1.96 × standard_error gives 95% confidence around mean for normal distributions). Availability of No. evaluation The following is an example for meta-predictor ML summary built from (Necci et al., Bioinformatics 2017). DOME Version 1.0 Data Provenance Protein Data Bank (PDB). X-ray structures missing residues. N = ​pos 339,603 residues. N = 6,168,717 residues. Previously used in ​ ​neg (Walsh et al., Bioinform​ atics 2015) as an independent benchmark set. Dataset splits training set: N/A N = 339,603 residues. N = 6,168,717 residues. No validation ​pos,test ​neg,test set. 5.​22% positives on the test se​t. Redundancy Not applicable. between data splits Availability of data Yes, URL: http://protein.bio.unipd.it/mobidblite/. Free use license. Optimization Algorithm Majority-based consensus classification based on 8 primary ML methods and post-processing. Meta-predictions Yes, predictor output is a binary prediction computed from the consensus of other methods; Independence of training sets of other methods with test set of meta-predictor was not tested since datasets from other methods were not available. Data encoding Label-wise average of 8 binary predictions. Parameters p = 3 (Consensus score threshold, expansion-erosion window, length threshold). No optimization. Features Not applicable. Fitting Single input ML methods are used with default parameters. Optimization is a simple majority. Regularization No. Availability of Not applicable. configuration Model Interpretability Transparent, in so far as meta-prediction is concerned. Consensus and post processing over other methods predictions (which are mostly balck boxes). No attempt was made to make the meta-prediction a black box. Output Classification, i.e. residues thought to be disordered. 20 Execution time ca. 1 second per representative on a desktop PC. Availability of Yes, URL: http://protein.bio.unipd.it/mobidblite/. software Bespoke license free for academic use. Evaluation Evaluation method Independent dataset Performance Balanced Accuracy, Precision, Sensitivity, Specificity, F1, MCC. measures Comparison DisEmbl-465, DisEmbl-HL, ESpritz Disprot, ESpritz NMR, ESpritz Xray, Globplot, IUPred long, IUPred short, VSL2b. Chosen methods are the methods from which the meta prediction is obtained. Confidence Not calculated. Availability of No. evaluation 21