DOME: Recommendations for supervised machine learning validation in biology Ian Walsh1,* ​, Dmytro Fishman2,* ​, Dario Garcia-Gasulla3 ​, Tiina Titma4 ​, Gianluca Pollastri5 ​, The ELIXIR ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ Machine Learning focus group# ​, Jennifer Harrow6,+ ​, Fotis E. Psomopoulos7,+ ​ & Silvio C.E. Tosatto8,+ ​ ​ ​ ​ 1Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore, 2Institute of ​ ​ ​ Computer Science, University of Tartu, Estonia, 3Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), Barcelona, Spain, ​ ​ 4School of Information Technologies, Tallinn University of Technology, Estonia, 5School of Computer Science, ​ ​ ​ University College Dublin, Ireland, 6ELIXIR HUB, South building, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, ​ ​ UK, 7Institute of Applied Biosciences, Centre for Research and Technology Hellas, Thessaloniki, Greece, 8Dept. of ​ ​ ​ ​ Biomedical Sciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy. *contributed equally ​ #see list of co-authors at the end of the manuscript ​ +corresponding authors ​ Abstract Modern biology frequently relies on machine learning to provide predictions and improve decision processes. There have been recent calls for more scrutiny on machine learning performance and possible limitations. Here we present a set of community-wide recommendations aiming to help establish standards of supervised machine learning validation in biology. Adopting a structured methods description for machine learning based on data, optimization, model, evaluation (DOME) will aim to help both reviewers and readers to better understand and assess the performance and limitations of a method or outcome. The recommendations are formulated as questions to anyone wishing to pursue implementation of a machine learning algorithm. Answers to these questions can be easily included in the supplementary material of published papers. Introduction With the steep decline in the cost of high-throughput technologies, large amounts of biological data are being generated and made accessible to researchers. Machine learning (ML) has been brought into the spotlight as a very useful approach to understand cellular1, genomic2, proteomic3, post-translational4, ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ metabolic5 and drug discovery data6 with the potential to result in ground-breaking medical ​ ​ applications7,8. This is clearly reflected in the corresponding growth of ML publications (Figure 1), ​ ​ reporting a wide range of modelling techniques in biology. While every novel ML method should be validated experimentally, this happens only in a fraction of the publications9. This sharp increase in ​ ​ publications inherently requires a corresponding increase in the number and depth of peer-reviews to offer critical assessment10 and improve reproducibility11,12. ​ ​ ​ ​ Guidelines or recommendations on how to appropriately construct ML algorithms can help to ensure correct results and predictions13,14. In the biomedical research field, communities have defined standard ​ ​ guidelines and best practices for scientific data management15 and reproducibility of computational ​ tools16,17. On the other hand, a demand exists in the ML community for a cohesive and combined set of ​ ​ 1 recommendations with respect to data, the optimization techniques, the final model, and evaluation protocols as a whole. Figure 1. Exponential increase of ML publications in biology. The number of ML publications per year is based ​ on Web of Science from 1996 onwards using the “topic” category for “machine learning” in combination with each of the following terms: “biolog*”, “medicine”, “genom*”, “prote*”, “cell*”, “post translational”, “metabolic” and “clinical”. Recently, a comment highlighted the need for standards in ML18, arguing for the adoption of ​ ​ on-submission checklists10 as a first step towards improving publication standards. Through a ​ community-driven consensus, we propose a list of minimal requirements asked as questions to ML implementers (Box 1) that, if followed, will help to assess the quality and reliability of the proposed methods more faithfully. We have focused on Data, Optimization, Model and Evaluation (DOME) as each component of an ML implementation usually falls within one of these four topics. Importantly, no specific solutions are discussed, only recommendations (Table 1) and a checklist are provided (Box 1). Our recommendations are made primarily for the case of supervised learning in biology in the absence of direct experimental validation, as this is the most common type of ML approach used. We do not discuss how ML can be used in clinical applications19,20. It also remains to be investigated if the DOME ​ ​ recommendations can be extended to other fields of ML, like unsupervised, semi-supervised and reinforcement learning. Development of the recommendations The recommendations outlined below were initially formulated through the ELIXIR ML focus group after the publication of a comment calling for the establishment of standards for ML in biology18. ​ ​ ELIXIR, initially established in 2014, is now a mature intergovernmental European infrastructure for biological data and represents over 220 research organizations in 22 countries across many aspects of bioinformatics21. Over 700 national experts participate in the development and operation of national ​ ​ services that