specification of the optimization protocol and the type of parameters/hyper-parameters are a vital characteristic of the final algorithm. Lack of documentation, including limited accessibility to relevant records for the involved parameters, hyper-parameters and optimization protocol may further compound the understanding of the overall model performance. 6 Figure 2. (Top) Classification metrics. For binary classification, true positives (tp), false positives (fp), false ​ negatives (fn) and true negatives (tn) together form the confusion matrix. As all classification measures can be calculated from combinations of these four basic values, the confusion matrix should be provided as a core metric. Several measures (shown as equations) and plots should be used to evaluate the ML methods. For descriptions on how to adapt these metrics to multi-class problems see 35 ​. (Bottom) Regression metrics. ML regression attempts ​ ​ ​ to produce predicted values (p) matching experimental values (e). Metrics (shown as equations) attempt to capture the difference in various ways. Alternatively, a plot can provide a visual way to represent the differences. It is advisable to report all in any ML work. 7 3. Model Equally important aspects related to ML models are their interpretability and reproducibility. Interpretable models can infer causal relationships from the data and can output logical reasoning for each of its predictions. They are especially relevant in areas of discovery such as drug design6 and ​ diagnostics33. Conversely, black box models often give accurate predictions but do not provide insight ​ ​ into why they made the predictions in a way humans can understand. Both interpretable and black box models are discussed in more detail elsewhere34. However, developing recommendations on the choice of ​ ​ black box or interpretability cannot be made as both have their merits given certain situations. The main recommendation would be that there is a statement on the model type, i.e. is it black box or interpretable (see Box 1), and if it is interpretable it should be a requirement to give clear examples of it doing so. Reproducibility is a key component to ensuring research outcomes can be further utilized and validated by the wider community. Poor model reproducibility extends beyond the documentation and reporting of the involved parameters, hyper-parameters and optimization protocol. Lacking access to the various components of a model (source code, model files, parameter configurations, executables), as well as having steep computational requirements to execute the trained models in the context of generating predictions based on new data, can both make reproducibility of the model either limited or impossible. 4. Evaluation There are two types of evaluation scenarios in biological research. The first is the experimental validation of the predictions made by the ML model in the laboratory. This is highly desirable but beyond the possibilities of many ML studies. The second is a computational assessment of the model performance using established metrics. The following deals with the latter and there are a few possible related risks with computational evaluation. Starting with the performance metrics, i.e. the quantifiable indicators of a model's ability to solve the given task, there are dozens of metrics available35 for assessing different ML classification and regression ​ problems. However, the plethora of options available, combined with the domain-specific expertise that might be required to select the appropriate metrics, can lead to the selection of inadequate performance measures. Often, there are critical assessment communities advocating certain performance metrics for biological ML models, e.g. CAFA3 and CAGI28, and it is recommended a new algorithm should use ones ​ ​ ​ from the literature and critical assessments. In the absence of literature, the ones shown in Figure 2 could be a starting point. Once performance metrics are decided, methods published in the same biological domain must be cross-compared using appropriate statistical tests (e.g. Student's t-test) and confidence intervals. Additionally, to prevent the release of ML methods that appear sophisticated but perform no better than simpler algorithms, baselines should be compared to the ‘sophisticated’ method and proven to be statistically inferior (e.g. small vs. deep neural networks). Open areas and limitations of the proposed recommendations The field of Machine Learning in biology is vast. As such, it would be a herculean task to identify cross-cutting recommendations that could be applicable to all branches of ML across all possible domains. Therefore, this work focuses exclusively on supervised ML applications, excluding unsupervised ML, clinical applications, and individual implementations through pipelines to name a few. Moreover, the primary goal of this work is to define requirements and best practices that can be of use in the reviewing process and creation of ML-related papers, while remaining agnostic as to the actual 8 underlying solutions. The intent is to trigger a discussion in the wider ML community leading to future work addressing possible solutions. Several key issues related to reproducibility (e.g. data is not published, data