all branches of ML across all possible domains. Therefore, this work focuses exclusively on supervised ML applications, excluding unsupervised ML, clinical applications, and individual implementations through pipelines to name a few. Moreover, the primary goal of this work is to define requirements and best practices that can be of use in the reviewing process and creation of ML-related papers, while remaining agnostic as to the actual 8 underlying solutions. The intent is to trigger a discussion in the wider ML community leading to future work addressing possible solutions. Several key issues related to reproducibility (e.g. data is not published, data splits are not reported and model source code with its final parameters and hyperparameters are not released) can be aided by a multitude of workflow systems that help to ensure and automate multi-step processes are completely reproducible by tracking model parameters and exact versions of the source code and libraries. Examples of commonly used workflows include Galaxy36 and Nextflow37 . Another de facto standard practice in ​ ​ ​ software engineering is using version control systems such as Github to create an online copy of the source code, which can also include parameters and documentation. Similar version control systems exist for datasets. Public repositories can store experimental data on demand for significant amounts of time, enabling a long-term reproducibility of the experiment. Existing software engineering tools can be easily used to address many of the DOME recommendations. Although having additional, more topic-specific recommendations in the future will undoubtedly be useful, in this work we aim to provide a first version that could be of general interest. Adapting the DOME recommendations to address the unique aspects of specific topics and domains, would be a task of those particular (sub-)communities. For example, having guidelines for data independence is tricky because each biological domain has its own set of guidelines for this. Nonetheless, we believe it is relevant to at least have a recommendation that authors describe how they achieved data split independence. Discussions on the correct independence strategies are needed for all of biology. Given ​ constructive consultation processes with ML communities, relying on our own experience, it is our belief that our manuscript can be useful as a first iteration of the recommendations for supervised ML in biology. This will have the additional benefit of kickstarting the community discussion with a coherent ​ but rough set of goals, thus facilitating the overall engagement and involvement of key stakeholders. For instance, topics to be addressed by (sub-)communities is how to adapt DOME to entire pipelines, unsupervised, semi-supervised, reinforcement, and other types of ML. E.g. in unsupervised learning, the evaluation metrics shown in Figure 2 would not apply and a completely new set of definitions are needed. Another considerable debate, as AI becomes more commonplace in society, is that ML algorithms differ in their ability to explain learned patterns back to humans. Humans naturally prefer actions or predictions to be made with reasons given. This is the black box vs. interpretability debate and we point those interested to excellent reviews as a starting point for thoughtful discussions38–41. ​ ​ Finally, we address the governance structure by suggesting a community-managed governance model similar to the open-source initiatives42. Community managed governance has been used in initiatives such ​ ​ as MIAME43 or the PSI-MI format44. This sort of structure ensures continuous community consultation ​ ​ ​ and improvement of the recommendations in collaboration with academic (CLAIRE, see: https://claire-ai.org/) and industrial networks (Pistoia Alliance, see: https://www.pistoiaalliance.org/). More importantly, this can be applied in particular to ML (sub-)communities working with specific problems requiring more detailed guidelines, e.g. imaging or clinical applications. We have set up a website (URL: https://www.dome-ml.org/) to provide a platform for governance and community involvement around the DOME recommendations, where news and upcoming events will be posted. As the recommendations and minimal requirements evolve over time, a version history will be available on the website. The template methods section in human (e.g. DOC) and machine readable format (YAML), as well as software for the automatic conversion of a YAML file into a human readable one are available from a dedicated GitHub repository (URL: https://github.com/MachineLearning-ELIXIR/dome-ml). Conclusion 9 The objective of our recommendations is to increase the transparency and reproducibility of ML methods for the reader, the reviewer, the experimentalist, and the wider community. We recognize that these recommendations are not exhaustive and should be viewed as a consensus-based first iteration of a continuously evolving system of community self-review. One of the most pressing issues is to agree to a standardized data structure to describe the most relevant features of the ML methods being presented. As a first step to address this issue, we recommend including an “ML summary table”, derived from Box 1, in future ML studies (see Supplementary Material). We recommend including the following