​ there? Has the dataset been previously used by other papers and/or is it recognized by the community? ○ Data splits: How many data points are in the training and test sets? Was a separate ​ validation set used, and if yes, how large was it? Is the distribution of data types in the training and test sets different? Is the distribution of data types in both training and test sets plotted? ○ Redundancy between data splits: How were the sets split? Are the training and test sets ​ independent? How was this enforced (e.g. redundancy reduction to less than X% pairwise identity)? How does the distribution compare to previously published ML datasets? ○ Availability of data: Is the data, including the data splits used, released in a public forum? ​ If yes, where (e.g. supporting material, URL) and how (license)? ● Optimization: (this section is to be repeated separately for each trained model) ​ ​ ○ Algorithm: What is the ML algorithm class used? Is the ML algorithm new? If yes, why is ​ it not published in a ML journal, and why was it chosen over better known alternatives? ○ Meta-predictions: Does the model use data from other ML algorithms as input? If yes, ​ which ones? Is it completely clear that training data of initial predictors and meta-predictor is independent of test data for the meta-predictor? ○ Data encoding: How was the data encoded and pre-processed for the ML algorithm? ​ ○ Parameters: How many parameters (p) are used in the model? How was p selected? ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ○ Features: How many features (f) are used as input? Was feature selection performed? If ​ ​ yes, was it performed using the training set only? ○ Fitting: Is the number of parameters (p) much larger than the number of training points ​ ​ and/or is the number of features (f) large (e.g. in classification is p>>(N +N ) and/or ​ ​pos ​neg ​ ​ f>100)? If yes, how was over-fitting ruled out? Conversely, if the number of training points seem very much larger than p and/or f is small (e.g. N +N >>p and/or f<5) how ​ ​pos ​neg ​ ​ was under-fitting ruled out? ○ Regularization: were any over-fitting prevention techniques performed (e.g. early stopping ​ using a validation set)? If yes, which ones? 4 ○ Availability of configuration: Are the hyper-parameter configurations, optimization ​ schedule, model files and optimization parameters reported available? If yes, where (e.g. URL) and how (license)? ● Model: (this section is to be repeated separately for each trained model) ​ ​ ○ Interpretability: Is the model black box or transparent? If the model is transparent, can you ​ give clear examples for this? ○ Output: Is the model classification or regression? ​ ○ Execution time: How much real-time does a single representative prediction require on a ​ standard machine? (e.g. seconds on a desktop PC or high-performance computing cluster) ○ Availability of software: Is the source code released? Is a method to run the algorithm such ​ as executable, web server, virtual machine or container instance released? If yes, where (e.g. URL) and how (license)? ● Evaluation: ​ ○ Evaluation method: How was the method evaluated? (E.g. cross-validation, independent ​ dataset, novel experiments) ○ Performance measures: Which performance metrics are reported? Is this set representative ​ (e.g. compared to the literature)? ○ Comparison: Was a comparison to publicly available methods performed on benchmark ​ datasets? Was a comparison to simpler baselines performed? ○ Confidence: Do the performance metrics have confidence intervals? Are the results ​ statistically significant to claim that the method is superior to others and baselines? ○ Availability of evaluation: Are the raw evaluation files (e.g. assignments for comparison ​ and baselines, statistical code, confusion matrices) available? If yes, where (e.g. URL) and how (license)? The above description is shown in table format in the Supplementary Material together with two fully worked-out examples. Scope of the recommendations The recommendations cover four major aspects of supervised ML according to the “DOME” acronym: data, optimization, model and evaluation. The key points and rationale for each aspect of DOME is described below and summarized in Table 1. More importantly, Box 1 gives an actionable checklist to implement ML methods, with the actual recommendations codified as questions. 1. Data State-of-the-art ML models are often capable of memorizing all the variation in training data. Such models when evaluated on data that they were exposed to during training would create an illusion of mastering the task at hand. However, when tested on an independent set of data (termed test or validation set), the performance would seem less impressive, suggesting low generalization power of the model. In order to tackle this problem, initial data should be divided randomly into non-overlapping parts. The simplest approach