1 gives an actionable checklist to implement ML methods, with the actual recommendations codified as questions. 1. Data State-of-the-art ML models are often capable of memorizing all the variation in training data. Such models when evaluated on data that they were exposed to during training would create an illusion of mastering the task at hand. However, when tested on an independent set of data (termed test or validation set), the performance would seem less impressive, suggesting low generalization power of the model. In order to tackle this problem, initial data should be divided randomly into non-overlapping parts. The simplest approach is to have independent train and test sets (possibly a third validation set). Alternatively, 5 the cross-validation or bootstrapping techniques which choose a new train/test split multiple times from the available data, is often considered a preferred solution22. ​ ​ Overlapping of train/test data splits are particularly troublesome to overcome in biology. For example, in predictions on entire gene and protein sequences independence of train-test could be achieved by reducing the amount of homologs in the data10,23. Modelling enhancer-promoter contacts require a ​ ​ different criterion, e.g., not sharing one endpoint24. Modeling protein domains might require the ​ ​ multi-domain sequence to be split into its constituent domains before homology reduction25. In short, ​ ​ each area of biology has its own recommendations for handling overlapping data issues and previous literature is vital to put forward a strategy. In Box 1, we propose a set of questions under the section ‘data splits’ that should help to evaluate potential overlap between train and test data. Reporting statistics on the data size and distribution of data types can help show if there is a good domain representation in all sets. Simple plots and/or tables showing the number of classes (classification), histogram of real values binned (regression), the different types of biological molecules in the data are vital pieces of information for each set. Further, in classification, including methods that address imbalanced classes26,27 are also needed if the class frequencies show so. Models trained on one dataset ​ may not be successful in dealing with data coming from adjacent but not identical datasets, a phenomenon known as covariance shift. The scale of this effect has been demonstrated in several recent publications, e.g. for prediction of disease risk from exome sequencing28. Although up to now the ​ ​ covariance shift remains an open problem, several potential solutions have been proposed in the area of transfer learning29. Moreover, the problem of training ML models that can generalize well on small ​ ​ training data, usually requires special models and algorithms30. ​ ​ Lastly, it is important to make as much data available for the public as possible12. Having open access to ​ ​ the data used for experiments including precise data splits would ensure better reproducibility of published research and as a result will improve the overall quality of published ML papers. If datasets are not readily available for example in public repositories, authors should be encouraged to find the most appropriate one, e.g. ELIXIR Deposition databases or Zenodo, to guarantee the long-term availability of such data. 2. Optimization Optimization, also known as training, refers to the process of changing values that constitute the model (parameters and hyper-parameters), including pre-processing steps, in a way that maximizes the model’s ability to solve a given problem. A poor choice of optimization strategy may lead to issues such as overor under-fitting31. A model that has suffered severe over-fitting will show an excellent performance on ​ ​ training data, while performing poorly on unseen data, rendering it useless for real-life applications. On the other side of the spectrum, under-fitting occurs when very simple models capable of capturing only ​ straightforward dependencies between features are applied to data of a more complex nature. Algorithms for feature selection32 can be employed to reduce the chances of over-fitting. However, feature selection ​ and other pre-processing actions come with their own recommendations. The main one being to abstain ​ from using non-training data for feature selection and pre-processing - a particularly hard issue to spot for meta-predictors, which may lead to an overestimation of performance. Finally, the release of files showing the exact specification of the optimization protocol and the type of parameters/hyper-parameters are a vital characteristic of the final algorithm. Lack of documentation, including limited accessibility to relevant records for the involved parameters, hyper-parameters and optimization protocol may further compound the understanding of the overall model performance. 6 Figure 2. (Top) Classification metrics. For binary classification, true positives (tp), false positives (fp), false ​ negatives (fn) and true negatives (tn) together form the confusion matrix. As all classification measures can be calculated from combinations of these four basic values, the confusion matrix should be provided as a core metric. Several measures (shown