if the DOME ​ ​ recommendations can be extended to other fields of ML, like unsupervised, semi-supervised and reinforcement learning. Development of the recommendations The recommendations outlined below were initially formulated through the ELIXIR ML focus group after the publication of a comment calling for the establishment of standards for ML in biology18. ​ ​ ELIXIR, initially established in 2014, is now a mature intergovernmental European infrastructure for biological data and represents over 220 research organizations in 22 countries across many aspects of bioinformatics21. Over 700 national experts participate in the development and operation of national ​ ​ services that contribute to data access, integration, training and analysis for the research community. Over 50 of these experts involved in the field of ML have established an ELIXIR ML focus group 2 (https://elixir-europe.org/focus-groups/machine-learning) which held a number of meetings to develop ​ ​ and refine the recommendations based on a broad consensus among them. Broad topic Be on the Consequences Recommendation(s) lookout for Data - Data size & ●Data not Independence of optimization (training) and evaluation quality representative of (testing) sets. (requirement) ​ domain application. This is especially important for meta algorithms, where - Appropriate independence of multiple training sets must be shown to be partitioning, ●Unreliable or biased independent of the evaluation (testing) sets. dependence performance between train evaluation. Release data preferably using appropriate long-term and test data. repositories, including exact splits (requirement) ​ ​ ●Cannot check data - Class imbalance credibility. Sufficient evidence of data size & distribution being representative of the domain. (recommendation) ​ ​ ​ - No access to data Optimization - Overfitting, ●Reported Clear statement that evaluation sets were not used for feature underfitting and performance too selection, pre-processing steps or parameter tuning. illegal parameter optimistic or too (requirement) ​ ​ tuning pessimistic. Reporting indicators on training and testing data that can aid - Imprecise ●Models noise or miss in assessing the possibility of under/overfitting e.g. train vs. parameters and relevant test error. (requirement) ​ protocols given. relationships. Release definitions of all algorithmic hyper-parameters, ●Results are not regularization protocols, parameters and optimization reproducible. protocol. (requirement) ​ ​ For neural networks, release definitions of train and learning curves. (recommendation) ​ ​ Include explicit model validation techniques, such as N-fold Cross validation. (recommendation) ​ ​ Model - Unclear if black ●An interpretable Describe the choice of black box / interpretable model. If box or model shows no interpretable show examples of it doing so. (requirement). ​ ​ explainable interpretable behaviour Release of: documented source code + models + executable model + UI/webserver + software containers. (recommendation) ​ ​ ●Cannot cross - No access to: compare methods, Report execution time averaged across many repeats. If resulting source reproducibility, & computationally tough compare to similar methods code, trained check data (recommendation) models & data credibility. ​ ​ ●Model takes too - Execution time much time to is impractical produce results Evaluation - Performance ●Biased performance Compare with public methods & simple models (baselines). measures measures reported. (requirement) ​ ​ inadequate ●The method is falsely Adoption of community validated measures and benchmark - No comparisons claimed as datasets for evaluation. (requirement) ​ ​ to baselines or state-of-the-art. other methods Comparison of related methods and alternatives on the same dataset. (recommendation) ​ ​ 3 - Highly variable ●Unpredictable Evaluate performance on a final independent hold-out set. performance. performance in (recommendation) ​ ​ production. Confidence intervals/error intervals and statistical tests to gauge prediction robustness. (requirement) ​ ​ Table 1. Supervised ML in Biology: concerns, the consequences they impart and recommendations/requirements (recommendations in italics and requirements in bold). Key terms underlined. ​ ​ ​ ​ Box 1: Structuring a Materials and Methods Section for Supervised Machine Learning Here we suggest a list of questions that must be asked about each DOME section to ensure high quality of ML analysis. ● Data: (this section is to be repeated separately for each dataset) ​ ​ ○ Provenance: What is the source of the data (database, publication, direct experiment)? If ​ data is in classes, how many data points are available in each class e.g., total for the positive (N ) and negative (N ) cases? If regression, how many real value points are ​pos ​neg ​ ​ there? Has the dataset been previously used by other papers and/or is it recognized by the community? ○ Data splits: How many data points are in the training and test sets? Was a separate ​ validation set used, and if yes, how large was it? Is the distribution of data types in the training and test sets different? Is the distribution of data types in both training and test sets plotted? ○ Redundancy between data splits: How were the sets split? Are the training and test sets ​ independent? How was this enforced (e.g. redundancy reduction to less than