use. PSO is able to support large-scale parallelization, and is particularly suitable for continuous and conditional HPO problems [19]; on the other hand, GA is executed sequentially, making it difficult to be parallelized. Therefore, PSO often executes faster than GA, especially for large configuration spaces and large datasets. However, an appropriate population initialization is crucial for PSO; otherwise, it may converge slowly or only identify a local instead of a global optimum. Yet, the impact of proper population initialization is not as significant for GA as for PSO [108]. Another limitation of GA is that it introduces additional hyper-parameters, like its crossover and mutation rates [18]. The strengths and limitations of the hyper-parameter optimization algorithms involved in this paper are summarized in Table 1. 36 Table1: ThecomparisonofcommonHPOalgorithms(nisthenumberofhyper-parameter values and k is the number of hyper-parameters) HPO Strengths Limitations Time Method Complexity ·Time-consuming, GS ·Simple. · Only efficient with categorical O(nk) HPs. ·Notconsiderpreviousresults. ·MoreefficientthanGS. RS · Not efficient with conditional O(n) ·Enableparallelization. HPs. Gradient- ·Fastconvergencespeedforcon- ·OnlysupportcontinuousHPs. O(nk) based tinuousHPs. ·Mayonlydetectlocaloptimums. models ·Poorcapacityforparallelization. ·FastconvergencespeedforconBO-GP · Not efficient with conditional O(n3) tinuousHPs. HPs. SMAC ·EfficientwithalltypesofHPs. ·Poorcapacityforparallelization. O(nlogn) ·EfficientwithalltypesofHPs. BO-TPE ·Poorcapacityforparallelization. O(nlogn) ·Keepconditionaldependencies. · Not efficient with conditional HPs. Hyperband ·Enableparallelization. O(nlogn) ·Requiresubsetswithsmallbudgetstoberepresentative. ·EfficientwithalltypesofHPs. ·RequiresubsetswithsmallbudBOHB O(nlogn) ·Enableparallelization. getstoberepresentative. ·EfficientwithalltypesofHPs. GA ·Poorcapacityforparallelization. O(n2) ·Notrequiregoodinitialization. ·EfficientwithalltypesofHPs. PSO ·Requireproperinitialization. O(nlogn) ·Enableparallelization. 5.2. Apply HPO Algorithms to ML Models Since there are many different HPO methods for different use cases, it is crucial to select the appropriate optimization techniques for different ML models. Firstly, if we have access to multiple fidelities, which means that it is able to define meaningful budgets: the performance rankings of hyper-parameter configurations evaluated on small budgets should be the same as or similar to the configuration rankings on the full budget (the original dataset); BOHB would be the best choice, since it has the advantages of both BO and Hyperband [6] [97]. On the other hand, if multiple fidelities are not applicable, which means thatusingthesubsetsoftheoriginaldatasetorthesubsetsoforiginalfeatures is misleading or too noisy to reflect the performance of the entire dataset, BOHB may perform poorly with higher time complexity than standard BO 37 models, then choosing other HPO algorithms would be more efficient [97]. ML algorithms can be classified by the characteristics of their hyperparameter configurations. Appropriate optimization algorithms can be chosen to optimize the hyper-parameters based on these characteristics. 5.2.1. One Discrete Hyper-parameter Commonly for some ML algorithms, like certain neighbor-based, clustering, and dimensionality reduction algorithms, only one discrete hyperparameter needs to be tuned. For KNN, the major hyper-parameter is k, the number of considered neighbors. The most essential hyper-parameter of k-means, hierarchicalclustering, andEMisthenumberofclusters. Similarly, fordimensionalityreductionalgorithms, includingPCAandLDA,theirbasic hyper-parameter is ’n components’, the number of features to be extracted. In these situations, Bayesian optimization is the best choice, and the three surrogates could be tested to find the best one. Hyperband is another good choice, which may have a fast execution speed due to its capacity for parallelization. Insomecases, peoplemaywanttofine-tunetheMLmodelby considering other less important hyper-parameters, like the distance metric of KNN and the SVD solver type of PCA; so BO-TPE, GA, or PSO could be chosen for these situations. 5.2.2. One Continuous Hyper-parameter Some linear models, including ridge and lasso algorithms, and some na¨ıve Bayes algorithms, involving multinomial NB, Bernoulli NB, and complement NB, generally only have one vital continuous hyper-parameter to be tuned. In ridge and lasso algorithms, the continuous hyper-parameter is ’alpha’, the regularization strength. In the three NB algorithms mentioned above, the critical hyper-parameter is also named ’alpha’, but it represents the additive (Laplace/Lidstone) smoothing parameter. In terms of these ML algorithms, BO-GP is the best choice, since it is good at optimizing a small number of continuous hyper-parameters. Gradient-based algorithms can also be used, but might only detect local optimums, so they are less effective than BO-GP. 5.2.3. A Few Conditional Hyper-parameters ItisnoticeablethatmanyMLalgorithmshaveconditionalhyper-parameters, like SVM, LR, and DBSCAN. LR has three correlated hyper-parameters, ’penalty’,’C’,andthesolvertype. Similarly,DBSCANhas’eps’and’min samples’ that must be tuned in conjunction. SVM is more complex, since after setting 38 adifferentkerneltype, thereisaseparatesetofconditionalhyper-parameters that need to be tuned next, as described in Section 3.1.3. Hence, some HPO methods that cannot effectively optimize conditional hyper-parameters, including GS, RS, BO-GP, and Hyperband, are not suitable for ML models with conditional hyper-parameters. For these ML methods, BO-TPE is the best choice if we have pre-defined relationships among the hyper-parameters. SMAC is also a good choice, since it also performs well for tuning conditional hyper-parameters. GA and PSO can be used, as well. 5.2.4. A Large Hyper-parameter Configuration Space with Multiple Types of Hyper-parameters Tree-based algorithms, including DT, RF, ET, and XGBoost, as well as DL algorithms, like DNN, CNN, RNN, are the most complex types of ML algorithms to bed tuned, since they have many hyper-parameters with various, different types. For these ML models, PSO is the best choice since it enables parallel executions to improve