is a basic hyper-parameter tuning method [8]. This method is implemented by 100% manual tuning and widely used by students and researchers. The workflow is simple: after building a ML model, a student tests many possible hyper-parameter values based on experience, guessing, or the analysis of previously-evaluated results; the process is repeated until this student runs outoftime(oftenreachingadeadline)orissatisfiedwiththeresults. Assuch, this approach requires a sufficient amount of prior knowledge and experience to identify optimal hyper-parameter values with limited time. 23 Manual tuning is infeasible for many problems due to several factors, like a large number of hyper-parameters, complex models, time-consuming model evaluations, and non-linear hyper-parameter interactions [9]. These factors inspired increased research into techniques for the automatic optimization of hyper-parameters [80]. 4.1.2. Grid Search Grid search (GS) is one of the most commonly-used methods to explore hyper-parameter configuration space [81]. GS can be considered an exhaustive search or a brute-force method that evaluates all the hyper-parameter combinations given to the grid of configurations [82]. GS works by evaluating the Cartesian product of a user-specified finite set of values [6]. GS cannot exploit the well-performing regions further by itself. Therefore, to identify the global optimums, the following procedure needs to be performed manually [2]: 1. Start with a large search space and step size. 2. Narrow the search space and step size based on the previous results of well-performing hyper-parameter configurations. 3. Repeat step 2 multiple times until an optimum is reached. GS can be easily implemented and parallelized. However, the main drawback of GS is its inefficiency for high-dimensionality hyper-parameter configuration space, since the number of evaluations increases exponentially as the number of hyper-parameters grows. This exponential growth is referred to as the curse of dimensionality [83]. For GS, assuming that there are k parameters, and each of them has n distinct values, its computational complexity increases exponentially at a rate of O(nk) [19]. Thus, only when the hyper-parameter configuration space is small can GS be an effective HPO method. 4.1.3. Random Search To overcome certain limitations of GS, random search (RS) was proposed in [13]. RS is similar to GS; but, instead of testing all values in the search space, RS randomly selects a pre-defined number of samples between the upperandlowerboundsascandidatehyper-parametervalues,andthentrains these candidates until the defined budget is exhausted. The theoretical basis of RS is that if the configuration space is large enough, then the global 24 optimums, or at least their approximations, can be detected. With a limited budget, RS is able to explore a larger search space than GS [13]. The main advantage of RS is that it is easily parallelized and resourceallocatedsinceeachevaluationisindependent. UnlikeGS,RSsamplesafixed number of parameter combinations from the specified distribution, which improves system efficiency by reducing the probability of wasting much time on a small poor-performing region. Since the number of total evaluations in RS is set to a fixed value n before the optimization process starts, the computational complexity of RS is O(n) [84]. In addition, RS can detect the global optimum or the near-global optimum when given enough budgets [6]. Although RS is more efficient than GS for large search spaces, there are still a large number of unnecessary function evaluations since it does not exploit the previously well-performing regions [2]. To conclude, the main limitation of both RS and GS is that every evaluation in their iterations is independent of previous evaluations; thus, they waste massive time evaluating poorly-performing areas of the search space. This issue can be solved by other optimization methods, like Bayesian optimization that uses previous evaluation records to determine the next evaluation [14]. 4.2. Gradient-based Optimization Gradient descent [85] is a traditional optimization technique that calculates the gradient of variables to identify the promising direction and moves towards the optimum. After randomly selecting a data point, the technique moves towards the opposite direction of the largest gradient to locate the next data point. Therefore, a local optimum can be reached after convergence. The local optimum is also the global optimum for convex functions. Gradient-based algorithms have a time complexity of O(nk) for optimizing k hyper-parameters [86]. For specific machine learning algorithms, the gradient of certain hyperparameters can be calculated, and then the gradient descent can be used to optimize these hyper-parameters. Although gradient-based algorithms have a faster convergence speed to reach local optimum than the previouslypresented methods in Section 4.1, they have several limitations. Firstly, they can only be used to optimize continuous hyper-parameters because other types of hyper-parameters, like categorical hyper-parameters, do not have gradient directions. Secondly, they are only efficient for convex functions because the local instead of a global optimum may be reached for non-convex 25 functions [2]. Therefore, the gradient-based algorithms can only be used in some cases where it is possible to obtain the gradient of hyper-parameters; e.g., optimizing the learning rate in neural networks