→− →− v := v +U (0,ϕ )(p − x )+U (0,ϕ )( p − x ), (28) i i 1 i i 2 i where U(0,ϕ) is the continuous uniform distributions based on the acceleration constants ϕ and ϕ . 1 2 After that, the particles move based on their new velocity vectors: →− →− →− x := x + v . (29) i i i The above procedures are repeated until convergence or termination constraints are reached. Compared with GA, it is easier to implement PSO, since PSO does not have certain additional operations like crossover and mutation. In GA, all chromosomes share information with each other, so the entire population moves uniformly toward the optimal region; while in PSO, only information on the individual best particle and the global best particle is transmitted to others, which is a one-way flow of information sharing, and the entire search process follows the direction of the current optimal solution [2]. The computationalcomplexityofPSOalgorithmisO(nlogn)[104]. Inmostcases, the convergence speed of PSO is faster than of GA. In addition, particles in PSO operate independently and only need to share information with each 34 other after each iteration, so this process is easily parallelized to improve model efficiency [9]. The main limitation of PSO is that it requires proper population initialization; otherwise, itmightonlyreachalocalinsteadofaglobaloptimum, especially for discrete hyper-parameters [105]. Proper population initialization requires developers’ prior experience or using population initialization techniques. Many population initialization techniques have been proposed to improve the performance of evolutionary algorithms, like the opposition-based optimization algorithm [101] and the space transformation search method [106]. Involving additional population initialization techniques will require more execution time and resources. 5. Applying Optimization Techniques to Machine Learning Algorithms 5.1. Optimization Techniques Analysis Grid search (GS) is a simple method, its major limitation being that it is time-consuming and impacted by the curse of dimensionality [83]. Thus, it is unsuitableforalargenumberofhyper-parameters. Moreover, GSisoftennot able to detect the global optimum of continuous parameters, since it requires a pre-defined, finite set of hyper-parameter values. It is also unrealistic for GS to be used to identify integer and continuous hyper-parameter optimums with limited time and resources. Therefore, compared with other techniques, GS is only efficient for a small number of categorical hyper-parameters. Random search is more efficient than GS and supports all types of hyperparameters. In practical applications, using RS to evaluate the randomlyselected hyper-parameter values helps analysts to explore a large search space. However, since RS does not consider previously-tested results, it may involve many unnecessary evaluations, which decrease its efficiency [13]. Hyperband can be considered an improved version of RS, and they both support parallel executions. Hyperband balances model performance and resource usage, so it is more efficient than RS, especially with limited time and resources [15]. However, GS, RS, and Hyperband all have a major constraint in that they treat each hyper-parameter independently and do not consider hyper-parameter correlations [107]. Thus, they will be inefficient for ML algorithms with conditional hyper-parameters, like SVM, DBSCAN, and logistic regression. 35 Gradient-based algorithms are not a prevalent choice for hyper-parameter optimization, since they only support continuous hyper-parameters and can onlydetectalocalinsteadofaglobaloptimumfornon-convexHPOproblems [2]. Therefore,gradient-basedalgorithmscanonlybeusedtooptimizecertain hyper-parameters, like the learning rate in DL models. Bayesian optimization models are divided into three different models — BO-GP, SMAC, and BO-TPE — based on their surrogate models. BO algorithms determine the next hyper-parameter value based on the previouslyevaluated results to reduce unnecessary evaluations and improve efficiency. BO-GPmainlysupportscontinuousanddiscretehyper-parameters(byrounding them), but does not support conditional hyper-parameters [14]; while SMAC and BO-TPE are both able to handle categorical, discrete, continuous, and conditional hyper-parameters. SMAC performs better when there are many categorical and conditional parameters, or cross-validation is used, while BO-GP performs better for only a few continuous parameters [15]. BO-TPE preserves the specified conditional relationships, so one advantage of BO-TPE over BO-GP is its innate support for specified conditional hyperparameters [14]. Metaheuristic algorithms, including GA and PSO, are more complicated than many other HPO algorithms, but often perform well for complex optimization problems. They support all types of hyper-parameters and are particularly efficient for large configuration spaces, since they can obtain the near-optimal solutions even within very few iterations. However, GA and PSO have their own advantages and disadvantages in practical use. PSO is able to support large-scale parallelization, and is particularly suitable for continuous and conditional HPO problems [19]; on the other hand, GA is executed sequentially, making it difficult to be parallelized. Therefore, PSO often executes faster than GA, especially for large configuration spaces and large datasets. However, an appropriate population initialization is crucial for PSO; otherwise, it may converge slowly or only identify a local instead of a global optimum. Yet, the impact of proper population initialization is not as significant for GA as for PSO [108]. Another limitation of GA is that it introduces additional hyper-parameters, like