model-based optimization models, including RS and BO-GP. The methods exhibit good performance with small search space and proper initialization. 6.9. GpFlowOpt GpFlowOpt [115] is a Python library for BO using GP as the surrogate model. It supports running BO-GP on GPU using the Tensorflow library. Therefore, GpFlowOpt is a good choice if BO is used in deep learning models with GPU resources available. 6.10. Talos Talos [116] is a Python package designed for hyper-parameter optimization with Keras models. Talos can be fully deployed into any Keras models and implemented easily without learning any new syntax. Several optimization techniques, including GS, RS, and probabilistic reduction, can be implemented using Talos. 41 6.11. Sherpa Sherpa [117] is a Python package used for HPO problems. It can be used with other ML libraries, including sklearn [31], Tensorflow[118], and Keras [33]. Itsupportsparallelcomputationsandhasseveraloptimizationmethods, including GS, RS, BO-GP (via GPyOpt), Hyperband, and population-based training (PBT). 6.12. Osprey Osprey [119] is a Python library designed to optimize hyper-parameters. Several HPO strategies are available in Osprey, including GS, RS, BO-TPE (via Hyperopt), and BO-GP (via GPyOpt). 6.13. FAR-HO FAR-HO [120] is a hyper-parameter optimization package that employs gradient-basedalgorithmswithTensorFlow. FAR-HOcontainsafewgradientbased optimizers, like reverse hyper-gradient and forward hyper-gradient methods. Thislibraryisdesignedtobuildaccesstothegradient-basedhyperparameter optimizers in TensorFlow, allowing deep learning model training and hyper-parameter optimization in GPU or other tensor-optimized computing environments. 6.14. Hyperband Hyperband [16] is a Python package for tuning hyper-parameters by Hyperband, abandit-basedapproach. Similarto’GridSearchCV’and’RandomizedSearchCV’ in scikit-learn, there is a class named ’HyperbandSearchCV’ inHyperbandthatcanbecombinedwithsklearnandusedforHPOproblems. In ’HyperbandSearchCV’ method, cross-validation is used for evaluation. 6.15. DEAP DEAP [121] is a novel evolutionary computation package for Python that contains several evolutionary algorithms like GA and PSO. It integrates with parallelization mechanisms like multiprocessing, and machine learning packages like sklearn. 42 6.16. TPOT TPOT [122] is a Python tool for auto-ML that uses genetic programming to optimize ML pipelines. TPOT is built on top of sklearn, so it is easy to implement TPOT on ML models. ’TPOTClassifier’ is its principal function, and several additional hyper-parameters of GA must be set to fit specific problems. 6.17. Nevergrad Nevergrad [123] is an open-source Python library that includes a wide range of optimizers, like fast-GA and PSO. In ML, Nevergrad can be used to tune all types of hyper-parameters, including discrete, continuous, and categorical hyper-parameters, by choosing different optimizers. 7. Experiments To summarize the content of Sections 3 to 6, a comprehensive overview of applying hyper-parameter optimization techniques to ML models is shown in Table 2. It provides a summary of common ML algorithms, their hyperparameters, suitable optimization methods, and available Python libraries; thus, data analysts and researchers can look up this table and select suitable optimization algorithms as well as libraries for practical use. To put theory into practice, several experiments have been conducted based on Table 2. This section provides the experiments of applying eight differentHPOtechniquestothreecommonandrepresentativeMLalgorithms on two benchmark datasets. In the first part of this section, the experimental setup and the main process of HPO are discussed. In the second part, the results of utilizing different HPO methods are compared and analyzed. The sample code of the experiments has been published in [124] to illustrate the process of applying hyper-parameter optimization to ML models. 7.1. Experimental Setup Based on the steps to optimize hyper-parameters discussed in Section 2.2, several steps were completed before the actual optimization experiments start. Firstly, two standard benchmarking datasets provided by the sklearn library [31], namely, the Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology dataset (MNIST) and the Boston housing dataset, are selected as 43 Table 2: A comprehensive overview of common ML models, their hyper-parameters, suitable optimization techniques, and available Python libraries MLAlgorithm MainHPs OptionalHPs HPOmethods Libraries Linearregression - - - - Ridge&lasso alpha - BO-GP Skpot penalty, BO-TPE, Hyperopt, Logisticregression c, - SMAC SMAC solver Skpot, weights, BOs, Hyperopt, KNN nneighbors p, Hyperband SMAC, algorithm Hyperband C, gamma, BO-TPE, Hyperopt, SVM kernel, coef0, SMAC, SMAC, epsilon(forSVR) degree BOHB BOHB NB alpha - BO-GP Skpot criterion, GA, TPOT, maxdepth, splitter, PSO, Optunity, DT minsamplessplit, minweightfractionleaf, BO-TPE, SMAC, minsamplesleaf, maxleafnodes SMAC, BOHB maxfeatures BOHB nestimators GA, maxdepth, TPOT, splitter, PSO, criterion, Optunity, RF&ET minweightfractionleaf, BO-TPE, minsamplessplit, SMAC, maxleafnodes SMAC, minsamplesleaf, BOHB BOHB maxfeatures nestimators, GA, minchildweight, TPOT, maxdepth, PSO, gamma, Optunity, XGBoost learningrate, BO-TPE, alpha, SMAC, subsample, SMAC, lambda BOHB colsamplebytree, BOHB estimators, Voting weights GS sklearn voting sklearn, baseestimator, maxsamples, GS, Skpot, Bagging nestimators maxfeatures BOs Hyperopt, SMAC baseestimator, BO-TPE, Hyperopt, AdaBoost nestimators, - SMAC SMAC learningrate numberofhiddenlayers, ‘units’perlayer, loss, optimizer, numberoffrozenlayers Activation, PSO, Optunity, Deeplearning (iftransferlearning learningrate, BOHB BOHB isused) dropoutrate, epochs, batchsize, earlystoppatience Skpot, init, BOs, Hyperopt, K-means nclusters ninit, Hyperband SMAC, maxiter Hyperband Skpot, nclusters, BOs, Hyperopt, Hierarchicalclustering linkage distancethreshold Hyperband SMAC, Hyperband BO-TPE, Hyperopt, eps, DBSCAN - SMAC, SMAC, minsamples BOHB BOHB covariancetype, Gaussianmixture ncomponents maxiter, BO-GP Skpot tol Skpot, BOs, Hyperopt, PCA ncomponents svdsolver Hyperband SMAC,