successive halving is how to allocate the budget and how to determine whether to test fewer configurations with a higher budget for each or to test more configurations with a lower budget for each [2]. 4.4.2. Hyperband Hyperband [16] is then proposed to solve the dilemma of successive halving algorithms by dynamically choosing a reasonable number of configurations. It aims to achieve a trade-off between the number of hyper-parameter configurations (n) and their allocated budgets by dividing the total budgets (B) into n pieces and allocating these pieces to each configuration (b = B/n). Successive halving serves as a subroutine on each set of random configurations to eliminate the poorly-performing hyper-parameter configurations and improve efficiency. The main steps of Hyperband algorithms are shown in Algorithm 1 [2]. Algorithm 1 Hyperband Input: b , b max min (cid:16) (cid:17) 1: s = log bmax max bmin 2: for s ∈ {b ,b −1,...,0} do max min 3: n = DetermineBudget(s) 4: γ = SampleConfigurations(n) 5: SuccessiveHalving(γ) 6: end for 7: return The best configuration so far. Firstly, the budget constraints b and b are determined by the total min max number of data points, the minimum number of instances required to train a sensible model, and the available budgets. After that, the number of configurations n and the budget size allocated to each configuration are calculated based on b and b in steps 2-3 of Algorithm 1. The configurations are min max sampled based on n and b, and then passed to the successive halving model 30 demonstrated in steps 4-5. The successive halving algorithm discards the identified poorly-performing configurations and passes the well-performing configurations on to the next iteration. This process is repeated until the final optimal hyper-parameter configuration is identified. By involving the successive halving searching method, Hyperband has a computational complexity of O(nlogn) [16]. 4.4.3. BOHB BayesianOptimizationHyperBand(BOHB)[97]isastate-of-the-artHPO technique that combines Bayesian optimization and Hyperband to incorporate the advantages of both while avoiding their drawbacks. The original Hyperband uses a random search to search the hyper-parameter configuration space, which has a low efficiency. BOHB replaces the RS method by BO to achieve both high performance as well as low execution time by effectively using parallel resources to optimize all types of hyper-parameters. In BOHB, TPE is the standard surrogate model for BO, but it uses multidimensional kernel density estimators. Therefore, the complexity of BOHB is also O(nlogn) [97]. IthasbeenshownthatBOHBoutperformsmanyotheroptimizationtechniques when tuning SVM and DL models [97]. The only limitation of BOHB is that it requires the evaluations on subsets with small budgets to be representative of evaluations on the entire training set; otherwise, BOHB may have a slower convergence speed than standard BO models. 4.5. Metaheuristic Algorithms Metaheuristic algorithms [98] are a set of algorithms mainly inspired by biological theories and widely used for optimization problems. Unlike many traditional optimization methods, metaheuristics have the capacity to solve non-convex, non-continuous, and non-smooth optimization problems. Population-based optimization algorithms (POAs) are a major type of metaheuristic algorithm, including genetic algorithms (GAs), evolutionary algorithms, evolutionary strategies, and particle swarm optimization (PSO). POAs start by creating and updating a population as each generation; each individual in every generation is then evaluated until the global optimum is identified [14]. The main differences between different POAs are the methods used to generate and select populations [17]. POAs can be easily parallelized since a population of N individuals can be evaluated on at most N threads or 31 machines in parallel [6]. Genetic algorithms and particle swarm optimization are the two main POAs that are popularly-used for HPO problems. 4.5.1. Genetic Algorithm Genetic algorithm (GA) [18] is one of the common metaheuristic algorithms based on the evolutionary theory that individuals with the best survivalcapabilityandadaptabilitytotheenvironmentaremorelikelytosurvive and pass on their capabilities to future generations. The next generation will also inherit their parents’ characteristics and may involve better and worse individuals. Better individuals will be more likely to survive and have more capable offspring, while the worse individuals will gradually disappear. After several generations, the individual with the best adaptability will be identified as the global optimum [99]. ToapplyGAtoHPOproblems,eachchromosomeorindividualrepresents a hyper-parameter, and its decimal value is the actual input value of the hyper-parameter in each evaluation. Every chromosome has several genes, which are binary digits; and then crossover and mutation operations are performed on the genes of this chromosome. The population involves all possible values within the initialized chromosome/parameter ranges, while the fitness function characterizes the evaluation metrics of the parameters [99]. Since the randomly-initialized parameter values often do not include the optimal parameter values, several operations, including selection, crossover, and mutation operations, must be performed on the well-performing chromosomes to identify the optimums [18]. Chromosome selection is implemented by selecting those chromosomes with good fitness function values. To keep the population size unchanged, the chromosomes with good fitness function