of the estimated classes in Gaussian mixture models, including ’full covariance’, ’tied’, ’diagonal’or’spherical’[72]. Otherhyper-parameterscouldalsobetuned,including ’max iter’ and ’tol’, representing the number of EM iterations to perform and the convergence threshold, respectively [31]. Hierarchical clustering [73] methods build clusters by continuously merging or splitting the built-in clusters. The hierarchy of clusters is represented byatree-structure; itsrootindicatestheuniqueclustergatheringallsamples, and its leaves represent the clusters with only one sample [73]. In sklearn, the 21 function ’AgglomerativeClustering’ is a common type of hierarchical clustering. In agglomerative clustering, the linkage criteria, ’linkage’, determines the distance between sets of observations and can be set to ’ward’, ’complete’, ’average’, or ’single’, indicating whether to minimize the variance of the all clusters, or use the maximum, average, or minimum distance between every two clusters, respectively. Like other clustering methods, its main hyper-parameter is the number of clusters, ’n clusters’. However, ’n clusters’ cannot be set if we choose to set the ’distance threshold’, the linkage distance threshold for merging clusters, since if so, ’n clusters’ will be determined automatically. DBSCAN [74] is a density-based clustering method that determines the clusters by dividing data into clusters with sufficiently high density. Unlike other clustering models, the number of clusters does not need to be configured before training. Instead, DBSCAN has two significant conditional hyper-parameters — the scan radius represented by ’eps’, and the minimum number of considered neighbor points represented by ’min samples’ — which define the cluster density together [75]. DBSCAN works by starting with an unvisited point and detecting all its neighbor points within a predefined distance ’eps’. If the number of neighbor points reaches the value of ’min samples’, this unvisited point and all its neighbors are defined as a cluster. The procedures are executed recursively until all data points have been visited. A higher ’min samples’ or a lower ’eps’ indicates a higher density to form a cluster. 3.2.2. Dimensionality Reduction Algorithms The increasing amount of collected data provides ample information, but also increases problem complexity. In real-world applications, many features are irrelevant or redundant to predict target variables. Dimensionality reduction algorithms often serve as feature engineering methods to extract important features and eliminate insignificant or redundant features. Two common dimensionality-reduction algorithms are principal component analysis (PCA) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA). In PCA and LDA, the numberoffeaturestobeextracted, representedby’n components’insklearn, is the main hyper-parameter to be tuned. Principal component analysis (PCA) [76] is a widely used linear dimensionality reduction method. PCA is based on the concept of mapping the original n-dimensional features into k-dimension features as the new orthogonal features, also called the principal components. PCA works by calculat22 ing the covariance matrix of the data matrix to obtain the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix. The matrix comprises the eigenvectors of k features with the largest eigenvalues (i.e., the largest variance). Consequently, the data matrix can be transformed into a new space with reduced dimensionality. Singular value decomposition (SVD) [77] is a popular method used to obtain the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the covariance matrix of PCA. Therefore, in addition to ’n components’, the SVD solver type is another hyper-parameter of PCA to be tuned, which can be assigned to ’auto’, ’full’, ’arpack’ or ’randomized’ [31]. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [78] is another common dimensionality reduction method that projects the features onto the most discriminative directions. UnlikePCA, whichobtainsthe direction with thelargestvariance as the principal component, LDA optimizes the feature subspace of classification. The objective of LDA is to minimize the variance inside each class and maximize the variance between different classes after projection. Thus, the projection points in each class should be as close as possible, and the distance between the center points of different classes should be as large as possible. Similar to PCA, the number of features to be extracted, ’n components’, should be tuned in LDA models. Additionally, the solver type of LDA can also be set to ’svd’ for SVD, ’lsqr’ for least-squares solution, or ’eigen’ for eigenvalue decomposition [79]. LDA also has a conditional hyper-parameter, the shrinkage parameter, ’shrinkage’, which can be set to a float value along with ’lsqr’ and ’eigen’ solvers. 4. Hyper-parameter Optimization Techniques 4.1. Model-free Algorithms 4.1.1. Babysitting Babysitting, also called ’Trial and Error’ or grad student descent (GSD), is a basic hyper-parameter tuning method [8]. This method is implemented by 100% manual tuning and widely used by students and researchers. The workflow is simple: after building a ML model, a student tests many possible hyper-parameter values based on experience, guessing, or the analysis of previously-evaluated results; the process is repeated until this student runs outoftime(oftenreachingadeadline)orissatisfiedwiththeresults. Assuch, this approach requires a sufficient amount of prior knowledge and experience to identify optimal hyper-parameter values with limited time. 23 Manual tuning is infeasible for many problems due to several factors, like a large number of hyper-parameters, complex models, time-consuming model evaluations,