to the class y. Based on the concept of relative frequency counting, θ can be estimated by a smoothed version of θ [31]: y yi N +α ˆ yi θ = , (19) yi N +αn y where N is the number of times when feature i is in a data point belonging yi to class y, and N is the sum of all N (i = 0,1,2,··· ,n). The smoothing y yi priors α ≥ 0 are used for features that are not in the learning samples. When α = 1, it is called Laplace smoothing; when α < 1, it is called Lidstone smoothing. Complement NB [51] is an improved version of the standard multinomial NB algorithm and is suitable for processing imbalanced data, while Bernoulli NB [52] requires samples to have binary-valued feature vectors so that the data can follow multivariate Bernoulli distributions. They both have the additive (Laplace/Lidstone) smoothing parameter, α, as the main hyper-parameter that needs tuning. To conclude, for na¨ıve Bayes algorithms, developers often do not need to tune hyper-parameters or only need to tune the smoothing parameter α, which is a continuous hyper-parameter. 3.1.5. Tree-based Models Decision tree (DT) [53] is a common classification method that uses a tree-structure to model decisions and possible consequences by summarizing a set of classification rules from the data. A DT has three main components: a root node representing the entire data; multiple decision nodes indicating decision tests and sub-node splits over each feature; and several leaf nodes representing the result classes [54]. DT algorithms recursively split the training set with better feature values to achieve good decisions on each subset. Pruning, which means removing some of the sub-nodes of decision nodes, is used in DT to avoid over-fitting. Since a deeper tree has more sub-trees to make more accurate decisions, the maximum tree depth, ’max depth’, is an essential hyper-parameter that controls the complexity of DT algorithms [55]. There are many other important HPs to be tuned to build effective DT models [56]. Firstly, the quality of splits can be measured by setting a mea16 suring function, denoted by ’criterion’ in sklearn. Gini impurity and information gain are the two main types of measuring functions. The split selection method, ’splitter’, can also be set to ’best’ to choose the best split, or ’random’ to select a random split. The number of considered features to generate thebestsplit, ’max features’, canalsobetunedasafeatureselectionprocess. Moreover, there are several discrete hyper-parameters related to the splitting process: the minimum number of data points to split a decision node or to obtain a leaf node, denoted by ’min samples split’ and ’min samples leaf’, respectively; the ’max leaf nodes’, indicating the maximum number of leaf nodes, and the ’min weight fraction leaf’ that means the minimum weighted fractionofthetotalweights, canalsobetunedtoimprovemodelperformance [31] [56]. Based on the concept of DT models, many decision-tree-based ensemble algorithms have been proposed to improve model performance by combining multiple decision trees, including random forest (RF), extra trees (ET), and extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) models. RF [57] is an ensemble learning method that uses the bagging method to combine multiple decision trees. In RF, basic DTs are built on many randomly-generated subsets, and theclasswiththemajorityvotingwillbeselectedtobethefinalclassification result [58]. ET [59] is another tree-based ensemble learning method that is similar to RF, but it uses all samples to build DTs and randomly selects the feature sets. In addition, RF optimizes splits on DTs while ET randomly makes the splits. XGBoost [32] is a popular tree-based ensemble model designed for speed and performance improvement, which uses the boosting and gradient descent methods to combine basic DTs. In XGBoost, the next input sample of a new DT will be related to the results of previous DTs. XGBoost aims to minimize the following objective function [55]: 1 (cid:88) t G2 j Obj = − +γt, (20) 2 H +λ j j=1 where t is the number of leaves in a decision tree, G and H are the sums of the first and second order gradient statistics of the cost function, γ and λ are the penalty coefficients. Since tree-based ensemble models are built with decision trees as base learners, they have the same hyper-parameters as DT models, as described in this subsection. Apart from these hyper-parameters, RF, ET, and XGBoost all have another crucial hyper-parameter to be tuned, which is the number of 17 decisiontreestobecombined, denotedby’n estimators’insklearn. XGBoost has several additional hyper-parameters, including [60]: ’min child weight’ which means the minimum sum of weights in a child node; ’subsample’ and ’colsample bytree’ used to control the subsampling ratio of instances and features, respectively; and four continuous hyper-parameters — ’gamma’, ’alpha’, ’lambda’, and ’learning rate’ — indicating the minimum loss reduction for a split, L , and L regularization term on weights, and the learning 1 2 rate, respectively.