[3]. The mathematical expression of the function f varies, depending on the objective function of the chosen ML algorithm and the performance metric function. Model performance can be evaluated by various metrics, like accuracy, RMSE, F1score, and false alarm rate. On the other hand, in practice, time budgets are an essential constraint for optimizing HPO models and must be considered. It often requires a massive amount of time to optimize the objective function of a ML model with a reasonable number of hyper-parameter configurations. Every time a hyper-parameter value is tested, the entire ML model needs to be retrained, and the validation set needs to be processed to generate a score that reflects the model performance. 9 The main process of HPO is as follows [10]: 1. Select the objective function and the performance metrics; 2. Selectthehyper-parametersthatrequiretuning,summarizetheirtypes, and determine the appropriate optimization technique; 3. Train the ML model using the default hyper-parameter configuration or common values as the baseline model; 4. Start the optimization process with a large search space as the hyperparameter feasible domain determined by manual testing and/or domain knowledge; 5. Narrow the search space based on the regions of currently-tested wellperforming hyper-parameter values, or explore new search spaces if necessary. 6. Return the best-performing hyper-parameter configuration as the final solution. However, most traditional optimization techniques [25] are unsuitable for HPO, since HPO problems are different from traditional optimization problems in the following aspects [10]: 1. The optimization target, the objective function of ML models, is usually a non-convex and non-differentiable function. Therefore, many traditional optimization methods designed to solve convex or differentiable optimization problems are often unsuitable for HPO problems, since these methods may return a local optimum instead of a global optimum. Additionally, an optimization target lacking smoothness makes certain traditional derivative-free optimization models perform poorly for HPO problems [26]. 2. The hyper-parameters of ML models include continuous, discrete, categorical, and conditional hyper-parameters. Thus, many traditional numerical optimization methods [27] that only aim to tackle numerical or continuous variables are unsuitable for HPO problems. 3. It is often computationally expensive to train a ML model on a largescale dataset. HPO techniques sometimes use data sampling to obtain approximate values of the objective function. Thus, effective optimization techniques for HPO problems should be able to use these approximate values. However, function evaluation time is often ignored in many black-box optimization (BBO) models, so they often require exact instead of approximate objective function values. Consequently, 10 many BBO algorithms are often unsuitable for HPO problems with limited time and resource budgets. Therefore, appropriateoptimizationalgorithmsshouldbeappliedtoHPO problems to identify optimal hyper-parameter configurations for ML models. 3. Hyper-parameters in Machine Learning Models To boost ML models by HPO, firstly, we need to find out what the key hyper-parameters are that people need to tune to fit the ML models into specific problems or datasets. In general, ML models can be classified as supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms, based on whether they are built to model labeled or unlabeled datasets [28]. Supervised learning algorithms are a set of machine learningalgorithmsthatmapinputfeaturestoatargetbytrainingonlabeled data, and mainly include linear models, k-nearest neighbors (KNN), support vector machines (SVM), na¨ıve Bayes (NB), decision-tree-based models, and deep learning (DL) algorithms [29]. Unsupervised learning algorithms are used to find patterns from unlabeled data and can be divided into clustering and dimensionality reduction algorithms based on their aims. Clustering methods mainly include k-means, density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise (DBSCAN), hierarchical clustering, and expectationmaximization (EM); while two common dimensionality reduction algorithms are principal component analysis (PCA) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA)[30]. Moreover, thereareseveralensemblelearningmethodsthatcombinedifferentsingularmodelstofurtherimprovemodelperformance,likevoting, bagging, and AdaBoost. In this paper, the important hyper-parameters of common ML models are studied based on their names in Python libraries, including scikit-learn (sklearn) [31], XGBoost [32], and Keras[33]. 3.1. Supervised Learning Algorithms In supervised learning, both the input x and the output y are available, and the goal is to obtain an optimal predictive model function f∗ to minimize the cost function L(f(x),y) that models the error between the estimated output and ground-truth labels. The predictive model function f varies based on its model structure. With limited model architectures determined by different hyper-parameter configurations, the domain of the ML model 11 function f is restricted to a set of functions F. Thus, the optimal predictive model f∗ can be obtained by [34]: n 1 (cid:88) f∗ = argmin L(f (x ),y ) (7) i i f∈F n i=1 where n is the number of training data points, x is the feature vector of i the i-th instance, y is the corresponding actual output, and L is the cost i function value of each sample. Many different loss functions exist in supervised learning algorithms, includingthesquareofEuclideandistance,cross-entropy,informationgain,etc. [34]. On the other hand, different ML algorithms generate different predictive model architectures based on different hyper-parameter configurations, which will be discussed