described in this subsection. Apart from these hyper-parameters, RF, ET, and XGBoost all have another crucial hyper-parameter to be tuned, which is the number of 17 decisiontreestobecombined, denotedby’n estimators’insklearn. XGBoost has several additional hyper-parameters, including [60]: ’min child weight’ which means the minimum sum of weights in a child node; ’subsample’ and ’colsample bytree’ used to control the subsampling ratio of instances and features, respectively; and four continuous hyper-parameters — ’gamma’, ’alpha’, ’lambda’, and ’learning rate’ — indicating the minimum loss reduction for a split, L , and L regularization term on weights, and the learning 1 2 rate, respectively. 3.1.6. Ensemble Learning Algorithms Apart from tree-based ensemble models, there are several other generic ensemble learning methods that combine multiple singular ML models to achieve better model performance than any singular algorithms alone. Three common ensemble learning models — voting, bagging, and AdaBoost — are introduced in this subsection [61]. Voting [61] is a basic ensemble learning algorithm that uses the majority voting rule to combine singular estimators and generate a comprehensive estimator with improved accuracy. In sklearn, the voting method can be set to be ’hard’ or ’soft’, indicating whether to use majority voting or averaged predicted probabilities to determine the classification result. The list of selected single ML estimators and their weights can also be tuned in certain cases. For instance, a higher weight can be assigned to a better-performing singular ML model in a voting model. Bootstrap aggregating [61], also named bagging, trains multiple base estimators on different randomly-extracted subsets to construct a final predictor [62]. When using bagging methods, the first consideration should be the type and number of base estimators in the ensemble, denoted by ’base estimator’ and’n estimators’,respectively. Then,the’max samples’and’max features’, indicating the sample size and feature size to generate different subsets, can also be tuned. AdaBoost[61],shortforadaptiveboosting,isanensemblelearningmethod that trains multiple base learners consecutively (weak learners), and later learners emphasize the mis-classified samples of previous learners; ultimately, a final strong learner is obtained. During this process, incorrectly-classified instances are retrained with other new instances, and their weights are adjusted so that the subsequent classifiers focus more on difficult cases, thereby gradually building a stronger classifier. In AdaBoost, the type of base estimator, ’base estimator’, can be set to a decision tree or other methods. In 18 addition, the maximum number of estimators at which boosting is terminated, ’n estimators’, and the learning rate that shrinks the contribution of each classifier, should also be tuned to achieve a trade-off between these two hyper-parameters. 3.1.7. Deep Learning Models Deep learning (DL) algorithms are widely applied to various areas — like computer vision, natural language processing, and machine translation — since they have had great success solving many types of problems. DL models are based on the theory of artificial neural networks (ANNs). Common types of DL architectures include deep neural networks (DNNs), feedforward neural networks (FFNNs), deep belief networks (DBNs), convolutional neural networks (CNNs), recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and many more [63]. All these DL models have similar hyper-parameters since they have similar underlying neural network architecture. Compared with other ML models, DL models benefit more from HPO since they often have many hyper-parameters that require tuning. The first set of hyper-parameters is related to the construction of a DL model; hence, named model design hyper-parameters. Since all neural network models have an input layer and an output layer, the complexity of a deep learning model mainly depends on the number of hidden layers and the number of neurons in each layer, which are two main hyper-parameters to build DL models [64]. These two hyper-parameters are set and tuned according to the complexity of the datasets or the problems. DL models need to haveenoughcapacitytomodelobjectivefunctions(orpredictiontasks)while avoiding over-fitting. At the next stage, certain function types need to be set or tuned. The first function type to configure is the loss function type, which is chosen mainly based on the problem type (e.g., binary cross-entropy for binary classification problems, multi-class cross-entropy for multi-classification problems, and RMSE for regression problems). Another important hyperparameter is the activation function type used to model non-linear functions, which be set to ’softmax’, ’rectified linear unit (ReLU)’, ’sigmoid’, ’tanh’, or ’softsign’. Lastly, the optimizer type can be set to stochastic gradient descent (SGD), adaptive moment estimation (Adam), root mean square propagation (RMSprop), etc. [65]. On the other hand, some other hyper-parameters are related to the optimization and training process of DL models; hence, categorized as optimizer hyper-parameters. The learning rate is one of the most important hyper19 parameters in DL models [66]. It determines the step size at each iteration, whichenablestheobjectivefunctiontoconverge. Alargelearningratespeeds up the learning process, but the gradient may oscillate around a local minimum value or even cannot converge. On the other hand, a small learning rate converges smoothly, but will largely increase model training