or complex ML models. One example of a resource-intensive model is deep learning models, since they view objective function evaluations as black-box functions and do not consider their complexity. However, the overall budget is often very limited for most practical situations, so HPO algorithms should be able to prioritize objective function evaluations and have a strong anytime performance, which indicates thecapacitytodetectoptimalornear-optimalconfigurationsevenwithavery limited budget [97]. For instance, an efficient HPO method should have a high convergence speed so that there would not be a huge difference between the results before and after model convergence, and should avoid random results even if time and resources are limited, like RS methods cannot. On the other hand, if conditions permit and an adequate budget is given, HPOapproachesshouldbeabletoidentifytheglobaloptimalhyper-parameter configuration, named a strong final performance [97]. 8.2.2. Comparability of HPO Methods To optimize the hyper-parameters of ML models, different optimization algorithms can be applied to each ML framework. Different optimization 52 techniques have their own strengths and drawbacks in different cases, and currently, there is no single optimization approach that outperforms all other approacheswhenprocessingdifferentdatasetswithvariousmetricsandhyperparameter types [3]. In this paper, we have analyzed the strengths and weaknesses of common hyper-parameter optimization techniques based on their principles and their performance in practical applications; but this topic could be extended more comprehensively. To solve this problem, a standard set of benchmarks could be designed and agreed on by the community for a better comparison of different HPO algorithms. For example, there is a platform called COCO (Comparing Continuous Optimizers) [127] that provides benchmarks and analyzes common continuous optimizers. However, there is, to date, not any reliable platform that provides benchmarks and analysis of all common hyper-parameter optimizationapproaches. ItwouldbeeasierforpeopletochooseHPOalgorithms in practical applications if a platform like COCO exists for HPO problems. In addition, a unified metric can also improve the comparability of different HPO algorithms, since different metrics are currently used in different practical problems [6]. On the other hand, based on the comparison of different HPO algorithms, a way to further improve HPO is to combine existing models or propose new models that contain as many benefits as possible and are more suitable for practical problems than existing singular models. For example, the BOHB method [97] has had some success dealing with HPO problems by combining Bayesian optimization and Hyperband. In addition, future research should consider both model performance and time budgets to develop HPO algorithms that suit real-world applications. 8.2.3. Over-fitting and Generalization Generalization is another issue with HPO models. Since hyper-parameter evaluations are done with a finite number of evaluations in datasets, the optimal hyper-parameter values detected by HPO approaches might not be the same optimums on previously-unseen data. This is similar to over-fitting issues with ML models that occur when a model is closely fit to a finite numberofknowndatapointsbutisunfittounseendata[128]. Generalization is also a common concern for multi-fidelity algorithms, like Hyperband and BOHB, since they need to extract subsets to represent the entire dataset. One solution to reduce or avoid over-fitting is to use cross-validation to identify a stable optimum that performs best in all or most of the subsets 53 instead of a sharp optimum that only performs well in a singular validation set[6]. However, cross-validationincreasestheexecutiontimeseveral-fold. It would be beneficial if methods can better deal with overfitting and improve generalization in future research. 8.2.4. Randomness There are stochastic components in the objective function of ML algorithms; thus, insomecases, theoptimalhyper-parameterconfigurationmight be different after each run. This randomness could be due to various procedures of certain ML models, like neural network initialization, or different sampled subsets in a bagging model [93]; or due to certain procedures of HPO algorithms, like crossover and mutation operations in GA. In addition, it is often difficult for HPO methods to identify the global optimums, due to the fact that HPO problems are mainly NP-hard problems. Many existing HPO algorithms can only collect several different near-optimal values, which is caused by randomness. Thus, the existing HPO models can be further improved to reduce the impact of randomness. One possible solution is to run a HPO method multiple times and select the hyper-parameter value that occurs most as the final optimum. 8.2.5. Scalability In practice, one main limitation of many existing HPO frameworks is that they are tightly integrated with one or a couple of machine learning libraries, like sklearn and Keras, which restricts them to only work with a single node instead of large data volumes [3]. To tackle large datasets, some distributed machine learning platforms, like Apache SystemML [129] and Spark MLib [130], have been developed; however, only very few HPO frameworks exist that support distributed ML. Therefore, more research efforts and scalable HPO frameworks, like the ones supporting distributed ML platforms, should be developed to support more libraries. On the other hand, future practical HPO algorithms should have the scalability to