1 (cid:88) σˆ2 = (r(x)−µˆ)2, (24) |B|−1 r∈B¯ 27 where B is a set of regression trees in the forest. The major procedures of SMAC are as follows [3]: 1. RF starts with building B regression trees, each constructed by sampling n instances from the training set with replacement. 2. A split node is selected from d hyper-parameters for each tree. 3. To maintain a low computational cost, both the minimum number of instances considered for further split and the number of trees to grow are set to a certain value. 4. Finally, themeanandvarianceforeachnewconfigurationareestimated by RF. ComparedwithBO-GP,themainadvantageofSMACisitssupportforall typesofvariables, includingcontinuous, discrete, categorical, andconditional hyper-parameters [91]. The time complexities of using SMAC to fit and predict variances are O(nlogn) and O(logn), respectively, which are much lower than the complexities of BO-GP [3]. 4.3.3. BO-TPE Tree-structured Parzen estimator (TPE) [12] is another common surrogate model for BO. Instead of defining a predictive distribution used in BOGP, BO-TPE creates two density functions, l(x) and g(x), to act as the generative models for all domain variables [3]. To apply TPE, the observation results are divided into good results and poor results by a pre-defined percentile y∗, and the two sets of results are modeled by simple Parzen windows [12]: (cid:26) l(x), if y < y∗ p(x|y,D) = . (25) g(x), if y > y∗ After that, the expected improvement in the acquisition function is reflected by the ratio between the two density functions, which is used to determine the new configurations for evaluation. The Parzen estimators are organized in a tree structure, so the specified conditional dependencies are retained. Therefore, TPE naturally supports specified conditional hyperparameters [91]. The time complexity of BO-TPE is O(nlogn), which is lower than the complexity of BO-GP [3]. BO methods are effective for many HPO problems, even if the objective function f is stochastic, non-convex, or non-continuous. However, the main drawback of BO models is that, if they fail to achieve the balance between 28 explorationandexploitation, theymightonlyreachalocalinsteadofaglobal optimum. RS does not have this limitation since it does not focus on any specific area. Additionally, it is difficult to parallelize BO models since their intermediate results are dependent on each other [7]. 4.4. Multi-fidelity Optimization Algorithms One major issue with HPO is the long execution time, which increases with a larger hyper-parameter configuration space and larger datasets. The execution time may be several hours, several days, or even more [93]. Multifidelity optimization techniques are common approaches to solve the constraint of limited time and resources. To save time, people can use a subset of the original dataset or a subset of the features [94]. Multi-fidelity involves low-fidelity and high-fidelity evaluations and combines them for practical applications [95]. In low-fidelity evaluations, a relatively small subset is evaluatedatalowcostbutwithpoorgeneralizationperformance. Inhigh-fidelity evaluations, a relatively large subset is evaluated with better generalization performance but at a higher cost than low-fidelity evaluations. In multifidelity optimization algorithms, poorly-performing configurations are discarded after each round of hyper-parameter evaluation on generated subsets, and only well-performing hyper-parameter configurations will be evaluated on the entire training set. Bandit-based algorithms categorized to multi-fidelity optimization algorithms have shown success dealing with deep learning optimization problems [3]. Two common bandit-based techniques are successive halving [96] and Hyperband [16]. 4.4.1. Successive Halving Theoretically speaking, exhaustive methods are able to identify the optimal hyper-parameter combination by evaluating all the given combinations. However, many factors, including limited time and resources, should be considered in practical applications. These factors are called budgets (B). To overcome the limitations of GS and RS and to improve efficiency, successive halving algorithms were proposed in [96]. The main process of using successive halving algorithms for HPO is as follows. Firstly, it is presumed that there are n sets of hyper-parameter combinations, and that they are evaluated with uniformly-allocated budgets (b = B/n). Then, according to the evaluation results for each iteration, half of the poorly-performing hyper-parameter configurations are eliminated, and 29 thebetter-performinghalfispassedtothenextiterationwithdoublebudgets (b = 2∗b ). The above process is repeated until the final optimal hyperi+1 i parameter combination is detected. Successive halving is more efficient than RS, but is affected by the tradeoff between the number of hyper-parameter configurations and the budgets allocated to each configuration [6]. Thus, the main concern of successive halving is how to allocate the budget and how to determine whether to test fewer configurations with a higher budget for each or to test more configurations with a lower budget for each [2]. 4.4.2. Hyperband Hyperband [16] is then proposed to solve the dilemma of successive halving algorithms by dynamically choosing a reasonable number of configurations. It aims to achieve a trade-off between the number of hyper-parameter configurations (n) and their allocated budgets by dividing the total budgets (B) into n pieces and allocating these pieces to each configuration (b = B/n). Successive halving serves as a subroutine