learningrate, BO-TPE, alpha, SMAC, subsample, SMAC, lambda BOHB colsamplebytree, BOHB estimators, Voting weights GS sklearn voting sklearn, baseestimator, maxsamples, GS, Skpot, Bagging nestimators maxfeatures BOs Hyperopt, SMAC baseestimator, BO-TPE, Hyperopt, AdaBoost nestimators, - SMAC SMAC learningrate numberofhiddenlayers, ‘units’perlayer, loss, optimizer, numberoffrozenlayers Activation, PSO, Optunity, Deeplearning (iftransferlearning learningrate, BOHB BOHB isused) dropoutrate, epochs, batchsize, earlystoppatience Skpot, init, BOs, Hyperopt, K-means nclusters ninit, Hyperband SMAC, maxiter Hyperband Skpot, nclusters, BOs, Hyperopt, Hierarchicalclustering linkage distancethreshold Hyperband SMAC, Hyperband BO-TPE, Hyperopt, eps, DBSCAN - SMAC, SMAC, minsamples BOHB BOHB covariancetype, Gaussianmixture ncomponents maxiter, BO-GP Skpot tol Skpot, BOs, Hyperopt, PCA ncomponents svdsolver Hyperband SMAC, Hyperband Skpot, solver, BOs, Hyperopt, LDA ncomponents shrinkage Hyperband SMAC, Hyperband 44 the benchmark datasets for HPO method evaluation on data analytics problems. MNIST is a hand-written digit recognition dataset used as a multiclassificationproblem, whiletheBostonhousingdatasetcontainsinformation about the price of houses in various places in the city of Boston and can be used as a regression dataset to predict the housing prices. At the next stage, the ML models with their objective function need to be configured. In Section 5.2, all common ML models are divided into five categories based on their hyper-parameter types. Among those ML categories, ”one discrete hyper-parameter”, ”a few conditional hyper-parameters”, and ”a large hyper-parameter configuration space with multiple types of hyperparameters” are the three most common cases. Thus, three ML algorithms, KNN, SVM, and RF, are selected as the target models to be optimized, since their hyper-parameter types represent the three most common HPO cases: KNN has one important hyper-parameter, the number of considered nearest neighbors for each sample; SVM has a few conditional hyper-parameters, like the kernel type and the penalty parameter C; RF has multiple hyperparameters of different types, as discussed in Section 3.1.5. Moreover, KNN, SVM, and RF can all be applied to solve both classification and regression problems. In the next step, the performance metrics and evaluation methods are configured. For each experiment on the selected two datasets, 3-fold cross validation is implemented to evaluate the involved HPO methods. The two most commonly-used performance metrics are used in our experiments. For classification models, accuracy is used as the classifier performance metric, which is the proportion of correctly classified data; while for regression models, the mean squared error (MSE) is used as the regressor performance metric, which measures the average squared difference between the predicted values and the actual values. Additionally, the computational time (CT) , thetotaltimeneededtocompleteaHPOprocesswith3-foldcross-validation, is also used as the model efficiency metric [55]. In each experiment, the optimized ML model architecture that has the highest accuracy or the lowest MSE and the optimal hyper-parameter configuration will be returned. After that, to fairly compare different optimization algorithms and frameworks, certain constraints should be satisfied. Firstly, we compare different HPO methods using the same hyper-parameter configuration space. For KNN, the only hyper-parameter to be optimized, ’n neighbors’, is set to be in the same range of 1 to 20 for each optimization method evaluation. The hyper-parameters of SVM and RF models for classification and regression 45 Table 3: Configuration space for the hyper-parameters of tested ML models ML Model Hyper-parameter Type Search Space n estimators Discrete [10,100] max depth Discrete [5,50] min samples split Discrete [2,11] RFClassifier min samples leaf Discrete [1,11] criterion Categorical [’gini’,’entropy’] max features Discrete [1,64] C Continuous [0.1,50] SVMClassifier kernel Categorical [’linear’,’poly’,’rbf’,’sigmoid’] KNNClassifier n neighbors Discrete [1,20] n estimators Discrete [10,100] max depth Discrete [5,50] min samples split Discrete [2,11] RFRegressor min samples leaf Discrete [1,11] criterion Categorical [’mse’,’mae’] max features Discrete [1,13] C Continuous [0.1,50] SVMRegressor kernel Categorical [’linear’,’poly’,’rbf’,’sigmoid’] epsilon Continuous [0.001,1] KNNRegressor n neighbors Discrete [1,20] problems are also set to be in the same configuration space for each type of problem. The specifics of the configuration space for ML models are shown in Table 3. The selected hyper-parameters and their search space are determined based on the concepts in Section 3, domain knowledge, and manual testings [81]. The hyper-parameter types of each ML algorithm are also summarized in Table 3. On the other hand, to fairly compare the performance metrics of optimizationtechniques, themaximumnumberofiterationsforallHPOmethods is set to 50 for RF and SVM model optimizations, and 10 for KNN model optimization based on manual testings and domain knowledge. Moreover, to avoid the impacts of randomness, all experiments are repeated ten times with different random seeds, and results are averaged for regression problems or given the majority vote for classification problems. In Section 4, more than ten HPO methods are introduced. In our experiments, eight representative HPO approaches are selected for performance comparison, including GS, RS, BO-GP, BO-TPE, Hyperband, BOHB, GA, and PSO. After setting up the fair experimental environments for each HPO method, the HPO experiments are implemented based on the steps discussed in Section 2.2. All experiments were conducted using Python 3.5 on a machine with