problems. 3. It surveys common HPO libraries and frameworks for practical use. 4. It discusses the open challenges and research directions of the HPO research domain. In this survey paper, we begin with a comprehensive introduction of the common optimization techniques used in ML hyper-parameter tuning problems. Section 2 introduces the main concepts of mathematical optimization and hyper-parameter optimization, as well as the general HPO process. In Section 3, we discuss the key hyper-parameters of common ML models that need to be tuned. Section 4 covers the various state-of-the-art optimization approaches that have been proposed for tackling HPO problems. In Section 5, we analyze different HPO methods and discuss how they can be applied to ML algorithms. In Section 6, we provide an introduction to various public libraries and frameworks that are developed to implement HPO. Section 7 presents and discusses the experimental results of using HPO on benchmark datasets for HPO method comparison and practical use case demonstration. In Section 8, we discuss several research directions and open challenges that should be considered to improve current HPO models or develop new HPO approaches. We conclude the paper in Section 9. 5 2. Mathematical Optimization and Hyper-parameter Optimization Problems The key process of machine learning is to solve optimization problems. To build a ML model, its weight parameters are initialized and optimized by an optimization method until the objective function approaches a minimum value or the accuracy approaches a maximum value [20]. Similarly, hyperparameter optimization methods aim to optimize the architecture of a ML model by detecting the optimal hyper-parameter configurations. In this section, the main concepts of mathematical optimization and hyper-parameter optimization for machine learning models are discussed. 2.1. Mathematical Optimization Mathematicaloptimizationistheprocessoffindingthebestsolutionfrom a set of available candidates to maximize or minimize the objective function [20]. Generally, optimization problems can be classified as constrained or unconstrainedoptimizationproblemsbasedonwhethertheyhaveconstraints for the decision variables or the solution variables. In unconstrained optimization problems, a decision variable, x, can take any values from the one-dimensional space of all real numbers, R. An unconstrained optimization problem can be denoted by [21]: minf(x), (1) x∈R where f(x) is the objective function. On the other hand, most real-life optimization problems are constrained optimization problems. The decision variable x for constrained optimization problems should be subject to certain constraints which could be mathematical equalities or inequalities. Therefore, constrained optimization problems or general optimization problems can be expressed as [21]: minf(x) x subject to g (x) ≤ 0,i = 1,2,··· ,m, (2) i h (x) = 0,j = 1,2,··· ,p, j x ∈ X, whereg (x),i = 1,2,··· ,m,aretheinequalityconstraintfunctions; h (x),j = i j 1,2,··· ,p, are the equality constraint function; and X is the domain of x. 6 The role of constraints is to limit the possible values of the optimal solution to certain areas of the search space, named the feasible region [21]. Thus, the feasible region D of x can be represented by: D = {x ∈ X|g (x) ≤ 0,h (x) = 0}. (3) i j To conclude, an optimization problem consists of three major components: a set of decision variables x, an objective function f(x) to be either minimized or maximized, and a set of constraints that allow the variables to take on values in certain ranges (if it is a constrained optimization problem). Therefore, the goal of optimization tasks is to obtain the set of variable values that minimize or maximize the objective function while satisfying any applicable constraints. Regarding ML models, many HPO problems have certain constraints, like the feasible domain of the number of clusters in k-means, as well as time and space constraints. Therefore, constrained optimization techniques are widely-used in HPO problems [3]. For optimization problems, in many cases, only a local instead of a global optimumcanbeobtained. Forexample, toobtaintheminimumofaproblem, assuming D is the feasible region of a decision variable x, a global minimum is the point x∗ ∈ D satisfying f(x∗) ≤ f(x)∀x ∈ D , while a local minimum is a point x∗ ∈ D in a neighborhood N satisfying f (x∗) ≤ f(x)∀x ∈ N ∩D [21] . Thus, the local optimum may only be an optimum in a small range instead of being the optimal solution in the entire feasible region. A local optimum is only guaranteed to be the global optimum in convex functions [22]. Convex functions are the functions that only have one optimum. Therefore, continuing to search along the direction in which the objectivefunctiondecreasescandetecttheglobalminimumvalue. Afunction f(x) is a convex function if for ∀x ,x ∈ X,∀t ∈ [0,1], 1 2 f (tx +(1−t)x ) ≤ tf (x )+(1−t)f (x ), (4) 1 2 1 2 where X is the domain of decision variables, and t is a coefficient in the range of [0,1]. An optimization problem is a convex optimization problem only when the objective function