On Hyperparameter Optimization of Machine Learning Algorithms: Theory and Practice Li Yang and Abdallah Shami Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Western Ontario, 1151 Richmond St, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 3K7 Abstract Machine learning algorithms have been used widely in various applications and areas. To fit a machine learning model into different problems, its hyperparameters must be tuned. Selecting the best hyper-parameter configuration for machine learning models has a direct impact on the model’s performance. It often requires deep knowledge of machine learning algorithms and appropriatehyper-parameteroptimizationtechniques. Althoughseveralautomatic optimization techniques exist, they have different strengths and drawbacks when applied to different types of problems. In this paper, optimizing the hyper-parameters of common machine learning models is studied. We introduce several state-of-the-art optimization techniques and discuss how to apply them to machine learning algorithms. Many available libraries and frameworks developed for hyper-parameter optimization problems are provided, and some open challenges of hyper-parameter optimization research are also discussed in this paper. Moreover, experiments are conducted on benchmark datasets to compare the performance of different optimization methods and provide practical examples of hyper-parameter optimization. This survey paper will help industrial users, data analysts, and researchers to better develop machine learning models by identifying the proper hyperparameter configurations effectively.1 Keywords: Hyper-parameter optimization, machine learning, Bayesian Email address: {lyang339, abdallah.shami}@uwo.ca (Li Yang and Abdallah Shami) 1General Hyperparameter Optimization Code and Tutorials: https://github.com/ LiYangHart/Hyperparameter-Optimization-of-Machine-Learning-Algorithms Preprint submitted to Neurocomputing October 6, 2022 2202 tcO 5 ]GL.sc[ 3v54751.7002:viXra optimization, particle swarm optimization, genetic algorithm, grid search. 1. Introduction Machine learning (ML) algorithms have been widely used in many applications domains, including advertising, recommendation systems, computer vision, natural language processing, and user behavior analytics [1]. This is because they are generic and demonstrate high performance in data analytics problems. Different ML algorithms are suitable for different types of problems or datasets [2]. In general, building an effective machine learning model is a complex and time-consuming process that involves determining the appropriate algorithm and obtaining an optimal model architecture by tuning its hyper-parameters (HPs) [3]. Two types of parameters exist in machine learning models: one that can be initialized and updated through the data learning process (e.g., the weights of neurons in neural networks), named model parameters; while the other, named hyper-parameters, cannot be directly estimated from data learning and must be set before training a ML model because they define the architecture of a ML model [4]. Hyper-parameters are the parameters that are used to either configure a ML model (e.g., the penalty parameter C in a support vector machine, and the learning rate to train a neural network) or to specify the algorithm used to minimize the loss function (e.g., the activation function and optimizer types in a neural network, and the kernel type in a support vector machine) [5]. To build an optimal ML model, a range of possibilities must be explored. The process of designing the ideal model architecture with an optimal hyper-parameter configuration is named hyper-parameter tuning. Tuning hyper-parameters is considered a key component of building an effective ML model, especially for tree-based ML models and deep neural networks, which have many hyper-parameters [6]. Hyper-parameter tuning process is different among different ML algorithms due to their different types of hyperparameters, including categorical, discrete, and continuous hyper-parameters [7]. Manual testing is a traditional way to tune hyper-parameters and is still prevalent in graduate student research, although it requires a deep understanding of the used ML algorithms and their hyper-parameter value settings [8]. However, manual tuning is ineffective for many problems due to certain factors,includingalargenumberofhyper-parameters,complexmodels,timeconsuming model evaluations, and non-linear hyper-parameter interactions. 2 These factors have inspired increased research in techniques for automatic optimization of hyper-parameters; so-called hyper-parameter optimization (HPO) [9]. The main aim of HPO is to automate hyper-parameter tuning process and make it possible for users to apply machine learning models to practical problems effectively [3]. The optimal model architecture of a ML model is expected to be obtained after a HPO process. Some important reasons for applying HPO techniques to ML models are as follows [6]: 1. It reduces the human effort required, since many ML developers spend considerable time tuning the hyper-parameters, especially for large datasets or complex ML algorithms with a large number of hyperparameters. 2. ItimprovestheperformanceofMLmodels. ManyMLhyper-parameters havedifferentoptimumstoachievebestperformanceindifferentdatasets or problems. 3. It makes the models and research more reproducible. Only when the same level of hyper-parameter tuning process is implemented can different ML algorithms be compared fairly; hence, using a same HPO method on different ML algorithms also helps to determine the most suitable ML model for a specific problem. It is crucial to select an appropriate optimization technique to detect optimal hyper-parameters. Traditional optimization techniques may be unsuitable for HPO problems, since many HPO problems are non-convex or non-differentiable optimization problems, and may result in a local instead of a