hyper-parameters. Although gradient-based algorithms have a faster convergence speed to reach local optimum than the previouslypresented methods in Section 4.1, they have several limitations. Firstly, they can only be used to optimize continuous hyper-parameters because other types of hyper-parameters, like categorical hyper-parameters, do not have gradient directions. Secondly, they are only efficient for convex functions because the local instead of a global optimum may be reached for non-convex 25 functions [2]. Therefore, the gradient-based algorithms can only be used in some cases where it is possible to obtain the gradient of hyper-parameters; e.g., optimizing the learning rate in neural networks (NN) [11]. Still, it is not guaranteed for ML algorithms to identify global optimums using gradientbased optimization techniques. 4.3. Bayesian Optimization Bayesian optimization (BO) [87] is an iterative algorithm that is popularly used for HPO problems. Unlike GS and RS, BO determines the future evaluation points based on the previously-obtained results. To determine the next hyper-parameter configuration, BO uses two key components: a surrogate model and an acquisition function [57]. The surrogate model aims to fit all the currently-observed points into the objective function. After obtaining the predictive distribution of the probabilistic surrogate model, the acquisition function determines the usage of different points by balancing the trade-off between exploration and exploitation. Exploration is to sample the instances in the areas that have not been sampled, while exploitation is to sample in the currently promising regions where the global optimum is most likely to occur, based on the posterior distribution. BO models balance the exploration and the exploitation processes to detect the current most likely optimal regions and avoid missing better configurations in the unexplored areas [88]. The basic procedures of BO are as follows [87]: 1. Build a probabilistic surrogate model of the objective function. 2. Detect the optimal hyper-parameter values on the surrogate model. 3. Apply these hyper-parameter values to the real objective function to evaluate them. 4. Update the surrogate model with new results. 5. Repeat steps 2 - 4 until the maximum number of iterations is reached. Thus, BOworksbyupdatingthesurrogatemodelaftereachevaluationon the objective function. BO is more efficient than GS and RS since it can detect the optimal hyper-parameter combinations by analyzing the previouslytested values, and running a surrogate model is often much cheaper than running the entire objective function. However, since Bayesian optimization models are executed based on the previously-tested values, they belong to sequential methods that are diffi26 cult to parallelize; but they can usually detect near-optimal hyper-parameter combinations within a few iterations [7]. Common surrogate models for BO include Gaussian process (GP) [89], random forest (RF) [90], and the tree Parzen estimator (TPE) [12]. Therefore, there are three main types of BO algorithms based on their surrogate models: BO-GP, BO-RF, BO-TPE. An alternative name for BO-RF is sequential model-based algorithm configuration (SMAC) [90]. 4.3.1. BO-GP Gaussian process (GP) is a standard surrogate model for objective function modeling in BO [87]. Assuming that the function f with a mean µ and a covariance σ2 is a realization of a GP, the predictions follow a normal distribution [91]: (cid:0) (cid:1) p(y|x,D) = N y|µˆ,σˆ2 , (22) where D is the configuration space of hyper-parameters, and y = f(x) is the evaluation result of each hyper-parameter value x. After obtaining a set of predictions, the points to be evaluated next are then selected from the confidence intervals generated by the BO-GP model. Each newly-tested data point is added to the sample records, and the BO-GP model is re-built with the new information. This procedure is repeated until termination. Applying a BO-GP to a size n dataset has a time complexity of O(n3) and space complexity of O(n2) [92]. One main limitation of BO-GP is that the cubic complexity to the number of instances limits the capacity for parallelization[3]. Additionally, itismainlyusedtooptimizecontinuousvariables. 4.3.2. SMAC Random forest (RF) is another popular surrogate function for BO to model the objective function using an ensemble of regression trees. BO using RF as the surrogate model is also called SMAC [90]. Assuming that there is a Gaussian model N (y|µˆ,σˆ2), and µˆ and σˆ2 are the mean and variance of the regression function r(x), respectively, then [90]: 1 (cid:88) µˆ = r(x), (23) |B| r∈B 1 (cid:88) σˆ2 = (r(x)−µˆ)2, (24) |B|−1 r∈B¯ 27 where B is a set of regression trees in the forest. The major procedures of SMAC are as follows [3]: 1. RF starts with building B regression trees, each constructed by sampling n instances from the training set with replacement. 2. A split node is selected from d hyper-parameters for each tree. 3. To maintain a low computational cost, both the minimum number of instances considered for further split and the number of trees to grow are set to a certain value. 4. Finally, themeanandvarianceforeachnewconfigurationareestimated by RF. ComparedwithBO-GP,themainadvantageofSMACisitssupportforall typesofvariables, includingcontinuous, discrete,