be set to stochastic gradient descent (SGD), adaptive moment estimation (Adam), root mean square propagation (RMSprop), etc. [65]. On the other hand, some other hyper-parameters are related to the optimization and training process of DL models; hence, categorized as optimizer hyper-parameters. The learning rate is one of the most important hyper19 parameters in DL models [66]. It determines the step size at each iteration, whichenablestheobjectivefunctiontoconverge. Alargelearningratespeeds up the learning process, but the gradient may oscillate around a local minimum value or even cannot converge. On the other hand, a small learning rate converges smoothly, but will largely increase model training time by requiringmoretrainingepochs. Anappropriatelearningrateshouldenablethe objective function to converge to a global minimum in a reasonable amount of time. Another common hyper-parameter is the drop-out rate. Drop-out is a standard regularization method for DL models proposed to reduce overfitting. In drop-out, a proportion of neurons are randomly removed, and the percentage of neurons to be removed should be tuned. Mini-batch size and the number of epochs are the other two DL hyperparameters that represent the number of processed samples before updating the model, and the number of complete passes through the entire training set, respectively [67]. Mini-batch size is affected by the resource requirements of the training process and the number of iterations. The number of epochs depends on the size of the training set and should be tuned by slowly increasing its value until validation accuracy starts to decrease, which indicates over-fitting. On the other hand, DL models often converge within a few epochs, and the following epochs may lead to unnecessary additional execution time and over-fitting, which can be avoided by the early stopping method. Early stopping is a form of regularization whereby model training stops in advance when validation accuracy does not increase after a certain number of consecutive epochs. The number of waiting epochs, called early stop patience, can also be tuned to reduce model training time. Apart from traditional DL models, transfer learning (TL) is a technology thatobtainsapre-trainedmodelonthedatainarelateddomainandtransfers it to other target tasks [68]. To transfer a DL model from one problem to another problem, a certain number of top layers are frozen, and only the remaining layers are retrained to fit the new problem. Therefore, the number of frozen layers is a vital hyper-parameter to tune if TL is used. 3.2. Unsupervised Learning Algorithms UnsupervisedlearningalgorithmsareasetofMLalgorithmsusedtoidentify unknown patterns in unlabeled datasets. Clustering and dimensionalityreduction algorithms are the two main types of unsupervised learning methods. Clustering methods include k-means, DBSCAN, EM, hierarchical clustering, etc.; while PCA and LDA are two commonly-used dimensionality 20 reduction algorithms [30]. 3.2.1. Clustering Algorithms In most clustering algorithms — including k-means, EM, and hierarchical clustering — the number of clusters is the most important hyper-parameter to tune [69]. The k-means algorithm [70] uses k prototypes, indicating the centroids of clusters, to cluster data. In k-means algorithms, the number of clusters, ’n clusters’, must be specified, and is determined by minimizing the sum of squared errors [70]: n (cid:88)k min (x −u )2, (21) i j uj∈C k i=0 where (x ,··· ,x ) is the data matrix; u , also called the centroid of the 1 n j cluster C , is the mean of the samples in the cluster; and n is the number k k of sample points in the cluster C . k To tune k-means, ’n clusters’ is the most crucial hyper-parameter. Besides this, the method for centroid initialization, ’init’, could be set to ’kmeans++’, ’random’ or a human-defined array, which slightly affects model performance. In addition, ’n init’, denoting the number of times that the k-means algorithm will be executed with different centroid seeds, and the ’max iter’, the maximum number of iterations in a single execution of kmeans, also have slight impacts on model performance [31]. The expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm [71] is an iterative algorithm used to detect the maximum likelihood estimation of parameters. Gaussian Mixture model is a clustering method that uses a mixture of Gaussian distributions to model data by implementing the EM method. Similar to k-means, its major hyper-parameter to be tuned is ’n components’, indicating the number of clusters or Gaussian distributions. Additionally, different methods can be chosen to constrain the covariance of the estimated classes in Gaussian mixture models, including ’full covariance’, ’tied’, ’diagonal’or’spherical’[72]. Otherhyper-parameterscouldalsobetuned,including ’max iter’ and ’tol’, representing the number of EM iterations to perform and the convergence threshold, respectively [31]. Hierarchical clustering [73] methods build clusters by continuously merging or splitting the built-in clusters. The hierarchy of clusters is represented byatree-structure; itsrootindicatestheuniqueclustergatheringallsamples, and its leaves represent the clusters with only one sample [73]. In sklearn, the 21 function ’AgglomerativeClustering’ is a common type of hierarchical clustering. In agglomerative clustering, the linkage criteria, ’linkage’, determines the distance between sets of observations and can be set to ’ward’, ’complete’, ’average’,