a set of functions F. Thus, the optimal predictive model f∗ can be obtained by [34]: n 1 (cid:88) f∗ = argmin L(f (x ),y ) (7) i i f∈F n i=1 where n is the number of training data points, x is the feature vector of i the i-th instance, y is the corresponding actual output, and L is the cost i function value of each sample. Many different loss functions exist in supervised learning algorithms, includingthesquareofEuclideandistance,cross-entropy,informationgain,etc. [34]. On the other hand, different ML algorithms generate different predictive model architectures based on different hyper-parameter configurations, which will be discussed in detail in this subsection. 3.1.1. Linear Models In general, supervised learning models can be classified as regression and classification techniques when used to predict continuous or discrete target variables, respectively. Linear regression [35] is a typical regression model that predicts a target y by the following equation: yˆ(w,x) = w +w x +...+w x , (8) 0 1 1 p p where the target variable y is expected to be a linear combination of p input features x = (x ,···x ), and yˆ is the predicted value. The weight vector 1 p w = (w ,···w ) is designated as an attribute ’coef ’, and w is defined as 1 p 0 another attribute ’intercept ’ in the linear model of sklearn. Usually, no hyper-parameter needs to be tuned in linear regression. A linear model’s performance mainly depends on how well the problem or data follows a linear distribution. To improve the original linear regression models, ridge regression was proposed in [36]. Ridge regression imposes a penalty on the coefficients, and aims to minimize the objective function [37]: p (cid:88) α(cid:107)w(cid:107)2 + (y −w ·x )2, (9) 2 i i i i=1 where(cid:107)w(cid:107) istheL -normofthecoefficientvector,andαistheregularization 2 2 strength. A larger value of α indicates a larger amount of shrinkage; thus, the coefficients are also more robust to collinearity. 12 Lasso regression [38] is another linear model used to estimate sparse coefficients, consisting of a linear model with an L priori added regularization 1 term. It aims to minimize the objective function [37]: p (cid:88) α(cid:107)w(cid:107) + (y −w ·x )2, (10) 1 i i i i=1 where α is the regularization strength and (cid:107)w(cid:107) is the L -norm of the coef1 1 ficient vector. Therefore, the regularization strength α is an crucial hyperparameter of both ridge and lasso regression models. Logistic regression (LR) [39] is a linear model used for classification problems. In LR, its cost function may be different, depending on the regularization method chosen for the penalization. There are three main types of regularization methods in LR: L -norm, L -norm, and elastic-net regulariza1 2 tion [40]. Therefore, the first hyper-parameter that needs to be tuned in LR is to the regularization method used in the penalization, ’l1’, ’l2’, ’elasticnet’ or ’none’, which is called ’penalty’ in sklearn. The coefficient, ’C’, is another essential hyper-parameter that determines the regularization strength of the model. Inaddition, the’solver’type, representingtheoptimizationalgorithm type, can be set to ’newton-cg’, ’lbfgs’, ’liblinear’, ’sag’, or ’saga’ in LR. The ’solver’ type has correlations with ’penalty’ and ’C’, so they are conditional hyper-parameters. 3.1.2. KNN K-nearest neighbor (KNN) is a simple ML algorithm that is used to classify data points by calculating the distances between different data points. In KNN, the predicted class of each test sample is set to the class to which most of its k-nearest neighbors in the training set belong. Assuming the training set T = {(x ,y ),(x ,y ),··· ,(x ,y )}, x is the 1 1 2 2 n n i feature vector of an instance, and y ∈ {c ,c ,··· ,c } is the class of the i 1 2 m instance, i = (1,2,···n), for a test instance x, its class y can be denoted by [41]: (cid:88) y = argmax I(y = c ),i = 1,2,··· ,n;j = 1,2,··· ,m, (11) i j cj xi∈N k (x) where I(x) is an indicator function, I = 1 when y = c , otherwise I = 0; i j N (x) is the field involving the k-nearest neighbors of x. k 13 In KNN, the number of considered nearest neighbors, k, is the most crucialhyper-parameter[42]. Ifk istoosmall,themodelwillbeunder-fitting; if k is too large, the model will be over-fitting and require high computational time. In addition, the weighted function used in the prediction can also be chosen from ’uniform’ (points are weighted equally) or ’distance’ (points are weighted by the inverse of their distance), depending on specific problems. The distance metric and the power parameter of the Minkowski metric can also be tuned as it can result in minor improvement. Lastly, the ’algorithm’ used to compute the nearest neighbors can also be chosen from a ball tree, a k-dimensional