continuous hyper-parameter space, like KNN. Conversely, hyperband is often not able to obtain the highest accuracy or the lowest MSE among the optimization methods, but their computational time is low because it works on the small-sized subsets. The performance of BO-TPE and BOHB is often better than others, since they can detect the optimal or near-optimal hyper-parameter configurations within a short computational time. For metaheuristics methods, GA and PSO, their accuracies are often higher than other HPO methods for classification problems, and their MSEs are often lower than other optimization techniques. However, their computationaltimeisoftenhigherthanBO-TPEandmulti-fidelitymodels, especially for GA, which does not support parallel executions. To summarize, it is simple to implement GS and RS, but they often cannot detect the optimal hyper-parameter configurations or cost much computationaltime. BO-GPandGAalsocostmorecomputationaltimethanmany other HPO methods, but BO-GP works well on small configuration space, while GA is effective for large configuration space. Hyperband’s computational time is low, but it cannot guarantee to detect the global optimums. For ML models with large configuration space, BO-TPE, BOHB, and PSO often work well. 8. Open Issues, Challenges, and Future Research Directions Although there have been many existing HPO algorithms and practical frameworks, someissuesstill need tobeaddressed, and severalaspectsinthis domain could be improved. In this section, we discuss the open challenges, current research questions, and potential research directions in the future. Theycanbeclassifiedasmodelcomplexitychallengesandmodelperformance challenges, as summarized in Table 10. 8.1. Model Complexity 8.1.1. Costly Objective Function Evaluations ToevaluatetheperformanceofaMLmodelwithdifferenthyper-parameter configurations, its objective function must be minimized in each evaluation. 50 Table 10: The open challenges and future directions of HPO research Category Challenges & Future Re- Brief Description quirements Costlyobjectivefunctioneval- HPO methods should reduce evaluation time Modelcomplexity uations onlargedatasets. Complexsearchspace HPOmethodsshouldreduceexecutiontimeon high dimensionalities (large hyper-parameter searchspace). Stronganytimeperformance HPOmethodsshouldbeabletodetecttheoptimal or near-optimal HPs even with a very limitedbudget. Modelperformance Strongfinalperformance HPO methods should be able to detect the global optimum when given a sufficient budget. Comparability There should exist a standard set of benchmarkstofairlyevaluateandcomparedifferent optimizationalgorithms. Over-fittingandgeneralization The optimal HPs detected by HPO methods should have generalizability to build efficient modelsonunseendata. Randomness HPO methods should reduce randomness on theobtainedresults. Scalability HPO methods should be scalable to multiplelibrariesorplatforms(e.g.,distributedML platforms). Continuous updating capabil- HPO methods should consider their capacity ity todetectandupdateoptimalHPcombinations oncontinuously-updateddata. Depending on the scale of data, the model complexity, and available computational resources, the evaluation of each hyper-parameter configuration may cost several minutes, hours, days, or even more [93]. Additionally, the values of certain hyper-parameters have a direct impact on the execution time, like the number of considered neighbors in KNN, the number of basic decision trees in RF, and the number of hidden layers in deep neural networks [125]. To solve this problem by HPO algorithms, BO models reduce the total number of evaluations by spending time choosing the next evaluating point instead of simply evaluating all possible hyper-parameter configurations; however, they still require much execution time due to their poor capacity for parallelization. On the other hand, although multi-fidelity optimization methods, like Hyperband, have had some success dealing with HPO problems with limited budgets, there are still some problems that cannot be effectively solved by HPO due to the complexity of models or the scale of datasets [6]. For example, the ImageNet [126] challenge is a very popular problem in the image processing domain, but there has not been any re51 search or work on efficiently optimizing hyper-parameters for the ImageNet challenge yet, due to its huge scale and the complexity of CNN models used on ImageNet. 8.1.2. Complex Search Space In many problems to which ML algorithms are applied, only a few hyperparameters have significant effects on model performance, and they are the mainhyper-parametersthatrequiretuning. However, certainotherunimportant hyper-parameters may still affect the performance slightly and may be considered to optimize the ML model further, which increases the dimensionality of hyper-parameter search space. As the number of hyper-parameters andconfigurationsincrease, theyexponentiallyincreasethedimensionalityof the search space and the complexity of the problems, and the total objective function evaluation time will also increase exponentially [7]. Therefore, it is necessary to reduce the influence of large search spaces on execution time by improving existing HPO methods. 8.2. Model Performance 8.2.1. Strong Anytime Performance and Final Performance HPO techniques are often expensive and sometimes require extreme resources, especially for massive datasets or complex ML models. One example of a resource-intensive model is deep learning models, since they view objective function evaluations as black-box functions and do not consider their complexity. However, the overall budget is often very limited for most practical situations, so HPO algorithms should be able to prioritize objective function evaluations and have a strong anytime performance, which indicates thecapacitytodetectoptimalornear-optimalconfigurationsevenwithavery limited budget [97]. For instance, an efficient HPO method should have a high convergence speed so that there would not be a huge difference between the results before and after model convergence, and should avoid random results even if