feasible region. A local optimum is only guaranteed to be the global optimum in convex functions [22]. Convex functions are the functions that only have one optimum. Therefore, continuing to search along the direction in which the objectivefunctiondecreasescandetecttheglobalminimumvalue. Afunction f(x) is a convex function if for ∀x ,x ∈ X,∀t ∈ [0,1], 1 2 f (tx +(1−t)x ) ≤ tf (x )+(1−t)f (x ), (4) 1 2 1 2 where X is the domain of decision variables, and t is a coefficient in the range of [0,1]. An optimization problem is a convex optimization problem only when the objective function f(x) is a convex function and the feasible region C is a convex set, denoted by [22]: minf(x) x (5) subject to x ∈ C. 7 On the other hand, nonconvex functions have multiple local optimums, but only one of these optimums is the global optimum. Most ML and HPO problems are nonconvex optimization problems. Thus, utilizing inappropriate optimization methods may only result in a local instead of a global optimum. There are many traditional methods that can be used to solve optimization problems, including gradient descent, Newton’s method, conjugate gradient, and heuristic optimization methods [20]. Gradient descent is a commonly-used optimization method that uses the negative gradient directionasthesearchdirectiontomovetowardstheoptimum. However, gradient descent cannot guarantee to detect the global optimum unless the objective function is a convex function. Newton’s method uses the inverse matrix of the Hessian matrix to obtain the optimum. Newton’s method has faster convergencespeedthangradientdescent, butoftenrequiresmoretimeandlarger space than gradient descent to store and calculate the Hessian matrix. Conjugate gradient searches along the conjugated directions constructed by the gradient of known data points to detect the optimum. Conjugate gradient hasfasterconvergencespeedthangradientdescent, butitscalculationofconjugate gradient is more complex. Unlike other traditional methods, heuristic methods use empirical rules to solve the optimization problems instead of following systematical steps to obtain the solution. Heuristic methods can often detect the approximate global optimum within a few iterations, but cannot guarantee to detect the global optimum [20]. 2.2. Hyper-parameter Optimization Problem Statement During the design process of ML models, effectively searching the hyperparameters’ space using optimization techniques can identify the optimal hyper-parameters for the models. The hyper-parameter optimization process consists of four main components: an estimator (a regressor or a classifier) with its objective function, a search space (configuration space), a search or optimization method used to find hyper-parameter combinations, and an evaluation function to compare the performance of different hyper-parameter configurations. The domain of a hyper-parameter can be continuous (e.g., learning rate), discrete (e.g., number of clusters), binary (e.g., whether to use early stopping or not), or categorical (e.g., type of optimizer). Therefore, hyper-parameters are classified as continuous, discrete, and categorical hyper-parameters. For continuousanddiscretehyper-parameters,theirdomainsareusuallybounded 8 in practical applications [12] [23]. On the other hand, the hyper-parameter configuration space sometimes contains conditionality. A hyper-parameter may need to be used or tuned depending on the value of another hyperparameter, called a conditional hyper-parameter [10]. For instance, in SVM, the degree of the polynomial kernel function only needs to be tuned when the kernel type is chosen to be polynomial. In simple cases, all hyper-parameters can take unrestricted real values, andthefeasiblesetX ofhyper-parameterscanbeareal-valuedn-dimensional vector space. However, in most cases, the hyper-parameters of a ML model often take on values from different domains and have different constraints, so their optimization problems are often complex constrained optimization problems [24]. For instance, the number of considered features in a decision tree should be in the range of 0 to the number of features, and the number of clusters in k-means should not be larger than the size of data points. Additionally, categorical features can often only take several certain values, like the limited choices of the activation function and the optimizer of a neural network. Therefore, the feasible domain of X often has a complex structure, which increases the problems’ complexity [24]. In general, for a hyper-parameter optimization problem, the aim is to obtain [19]: x∗ = argminf(x), (6) x∈X wheref(x)istheobjectivefunctiontobeminimized, suchastheerrorrateor therootmeansquarederror(RMSE);x∗ isthehyper-parameterconfiguration that produces the optimum value of f(x); and a hyper-parameter x can take any value in the search space X. The aim of HPO is to achieve optimal or near-optimal model performance by tuning hyper-parameters within the given budgets [3]. The mathematical expression of the function f varies, depending on the objective function of the chosen ML algorithm and the performance metric function. Model performance can be evaluated by various metrics, like accuracy, RMSE, F1score, and false alarm rate. On the other hand, in practice, time budgets are an essential constraint for optimizing HPO models and must be considered. It often requires a massive amount of time to optimize the objective function of a ML model with a reasonable number of hyper-parameter configurations. Every time a hyper-parameter value is tested, the entire ML model needs to be retrained, and