genes, which are binary digits; and then crossover and mutation operations are performed on the genes of this chromosome. The population involves all possible values within the initialized chromosome/parameter ranges, while the fitness function characterizes the evaluation metrics of the parameters [99]. Since the randomly-initialized parameter values often do not include the optimal parameter values, several operations, including selection, crossover, and mutation operations, must be performed on the well-performing chromosomes to identify the optimums [18]. Chromosome selection is implemented by selecting those chromosomes with good fitness function values. To keep the population size unchanged, the chromosomes with good fitness function values are passed to the next generation with higher probability, where they generate new chromosomes with the parents’ best characteristics. Chromosome selection ensures that good characteristics of each generation can be passed to later generations. Crossover is used to generate new chromosomes by exchanging a proportion of genes in different chromosomes. Mutation operations are also used to generate new chromosomes by randomly altering one or more genes of a chromosome. Crossover and mutation operations enable later generations to have different characteristics and reduce the chance of missing good characteristics [3]. The main procedures of GA are as follows [98]: 1. Randomly initialize the population, chromosomes, and genes, which 32 representtheentiresearchspace,hyper-parameters,andhyper-parameter values, respectively. 2. Evaluate the performance of each individual in the current generation by calculating the fitness function, which indicates the objective function of a ML model. 3. Perform selection, crossover, and mutation operations on the chromosomes to produce a new generation involving the next hyper-parameter configurations to be evaluated. 4. Repeat steps 2 & 3 until the termination condition is met. 5. Terminate and output the optimal hyper-parameter configuration. Among the above steps, the population initialization step is an important step of GA and PSO since it provides an initial guess of the optimal values. Although the initialized values will be iteratively improved in the optimization process, a suitable population initialization method can significantly improve the convergence speed and performance of POAs. A good initial population of hyper-parameters should involve individuals that are close to global optimums by covering the promising regions and should not be localized to an unpromising region of the search space [100]. To generate hyper-parameter configuration candidates for the initial population, random initialization that simply creates the initial population with random values in the given search space is often used in GA [101]. Thus, GA is easily implemented and does not necessitate good initializations, because its selection, crossover, and mutation operations lower the possibility of missing the global optimum. Hence, it is useful when the data analyst does not have much experience determining a potential appropriate initial search space for the hyperparameters. ThemainlimitationofGAisthatthealgorithmitselfintroduces additional hyper-parameters to be configured, including the fitness function type, population size, crossover rate, and mutation rate. Moreover, GA is a sequential execution algorithm, making it difficult to parallelize. The time complexity of GA is O(n2) [102]. As a result, sometimes, GA may be inefficient due to its low convergence speed. 4.5.2. Particle Swarm Optimization Particle swarm optimization (PSO) [103] is another set of evolutionary algorithms that are commonly used for optimization problems. PSO algorithmsareinspiredbybiologicalpopulationsthatexhibitbothindividualand 33 social behaviors [17]. PSO works by enabling a group of particles (swarm) to traverse the search space in a semi-random manner [9]. PSO algorithms identify the optimal solution through cooperation and information sharing among individual particles in a group. In PSO, there are a group of n particles in a swarm S [2]: S = (S ,S ,··· ,S ), (26) 1 2 n and each particle S is represented by a vector: i →− →− →− S =< x , v , p >, (27) i i i i →− →− →− where x is the current position, v is the current velocity, and p is the i i i known best position of the particle so far. After initializing the position and velocity of each particle,very particle evaluates the current position and records the position with its performance →− score. In the next iteration, the velocity v of each particle is changed based i →− →− on the previous position p and the current global optimal position p : i →− →− →− →− →− →− v := v +U (0,ϕ )(p − x )+U (0,ϕ )( p − x ), (28) i i 1 i i 2 i where U(0,ϕ) is the continuous uniform distributions based on the acceleration constants ϕ and ϕ . 1 2 After that, the particles move based on their new velocity vectors: →− →− →− x := x + v . (29) i i i The above procedures are repeated until convergence or termination constraints are reached. Compared with GA, it is easier to implement PSO, since PSO does not have certain additional operations like crossover and mutation.