number of hyperparameters. 2. ItimprovestheperformanceofMLmodels. ManyMLhyper-parameters havedifferentoptimumstoachievebestperformanceindifferentdatasets or problems. 3. It makes the models and research more reproducible. Only when the same level of hyper-parameter tuning process is implemented can different ML algorithms be compared fairly; hence, using a same HPO method on different ML algorithms also helps to determine the most suitable ML model for a specific problem. It is crucial to select an appropriate optimization technique to detect optimal hyper-parameters. Traditional optimization techniques may be unsuitable for HPO problems, since many HPO problems are non-convex or non-differentiable optimization problems, and may result in a local instead of a global optimum [10]. Gradient descent-based methods are a common type of traditional optimization algorithm that can be used to tune continuous hyper-parameters by calculating their gradients [11]. For example, the learning rate in a neural network can be optimized by a gradient-based method. Compared with traditional optimization methods like gradient descent, many other optimization techniques are more suitable for HPO problems, including decision-theoretic approaches, Bayesian optimization models, multifidelity optimization techniques, and metaheuristics algorithms [7]. Apart from detecting continuous hyper-parameters, many of these algorithms also have the capacity to effectively identify discrete, categorical, and conditional hyper-parameters. Decision-theoretic methods are based on the concept of defining a hyperparameter search space and then detecting the hyper-parameter combina3 tions in the search space, ultimately selecting the best-performing hyperparameter combination. Grid search (GS) [12] is a decision-theoretic approach that involves exhaustively searching for a fixed domain of hyperparameter values. Random search (RS) [13] is another decision-theoretic method that randomly selects hyper-parameter combinations in the search space, givenlimitedexecutiontimeandresources. InGSandRS,eachhyperparameter configuration is treated independently. UnlikeGSandRS,Bayesianoptimization(BO)[14]modelsdeterminethe next hyper-parameter value based on the previous results of tested hyperparameter values, which avoids many unnecessary evaluations; thus, BO can detecttheoptimalhyper-parametercombinationwithinfeweriterationsthan GS and RS. To be applied to different problems, BO can model the distributionoftheobjectivefunctionusingdifferentmodelsasthesurrogatefunction, including Gaussian process (GP), random forest (RF), and tree-structured Parzen estimators (TPE) models [15]. BO-RF and BO-TPE can retain the conditionality of variables [15]. Thus, they can be used to optimize conditional hyper-parameters, like the kernel type and the penalty parameter C in a support vector machine (SVM). However, since BO models work sequentially to balance the exploration of unexplored areas and the exploitation of currently-tested regions, it is difficult to parallelize them. Training a ML model often takes considerable time and space. Multifidelity optimization algorithms are developed to tackle problems with limited resources, and the most common ones being bandit-based algorithms. Hyperband [16] is a popular bandit-based optimization technique that can be considered an improved version of RS. It generates small versions of datasets and allocates a same budget to each hyper-parameter combination. In each iteration of Hyperband, poorly-performing hyper-parameter configurations are eliminated to save time and resources. Metaheuristic algorithms are a set of techniques used to solve complex, large search space and non-convex optimization problems to which HPO problems belong [17]. Among all metaheuristic methods, genetic algorithm (GA) [18] and particle swarm optimization (PSO) [19] are the two most prevalent metaheuristic algorithms used for HPO problems. Genetic algorithms detect well-performing hyper-parameter combinations in each generation, and pass them to the next generation until the best-performing combination is identified. In PSO algorithms, each particle communicates with other particles to detect and update the current global optimum in each iteration until the final optimum is detected. Metaheuristics can efficiently 4 explore the search space to detect optimal or near-optimal solutions. Hence, they are particularly suitable for the HPO problems with large configuration space due to their high efficiency. For instance, they can be used in deep neural networks (DNNs) which have a large configuration space with multiple hyper-parameters, including the activation and optimizer types, the learning rate, drop-out rate, etc. Although using HPO algorithms to tune the hyper-parameters of ML models greatly improves the model performance, certain other aspects, like their computational complexity, still have much room for improvement. On the other hand, since different HPO models have their own advantages and suitable problems, overviewing them is necessary for proper optimization algorithm selection in terms of different types of ML models and problems. This paper makes the following contributions: 1. ItreviewscommonMLalgorithmsandtheirimportanthyper-parameters. 2. ItanalyzescommonHPOtechniques,includingtheirbenefitsanddrawbacks, to help apply them to different ML models by appropriate algorithm selection in practical problems. 3. It surveys common HPO libraries and frameworks for practical use. 4. It discusses the open challenges and research directions of the HPO research domain. In this survey paper, we begin with a comprehensive introduction of the common optimization techniques used in ML hyper-parameter tuning problems. Section 2 introduces the main concepts of mathematical optimization and hyper-parameter optimization, as well as the general HPO process. In Section 3, we discuss the key hyper-parameters of common ML models that need to be tuned. Section 4 covers the various state-of-the-art optimization approaches that have been proposed for tackling HPO problems. In