BO-TPE is the best choice if we have pre-defined relationships among the hyper-parameters. SMAC is also a good choice, since it also performs well for tuning conditional hyper-parameters. GA and PSO can be used, as well. 5.2.4. A Large Hyper-parameter Configuration Space with Multiple Types of Hyper-parameters Tree-based algorithms, including DT, RF, ET, and XGBoost, as well as DL algorithms, like DNN, CNN, RNN, are the most complex types of ML algorithms to bed tuned, since they have many hyper-parameters with various, different types. For these ML models, PSO is the best choice since it enables parallel executions to improve efficiency, particularly for DL models that often require massive training time. Some other techniques, like GA, BO-TPE, and SMAC can also be used, but they may cost more time than PSO, since it is difficult to parallelize these techniques. 5.2.5. Categorical Hyper-parameters This category of hyper-parameters is mainly for ensemble learning algorithms, since their major hyper-parameter is a categorical hyper-parameter. ForbaggingandAdaBoost,thecategoricalhyper-parameteris’base estimator’, which is set to be a singular ML model. For voting, it is ’estimators’, indicating a list of ML singular models to be combined. The voting method has another categorical hyper-parameter, ’voting’, which is used to choose whether to use a hard or soft voting method. If we only consider these categorical hyper-parameters, GS would be sufficient to detect their suitable base machine learners. On the other hand, in many cases, other hyper-parameters need to be considered, like ’n estimators’, ’max samples’, and ’max features’ in bagging, as well as ’n estimators’ and ’learning rate’ in AdaBoost; consequently, BOalgorithmswouldbeabetterchoicetooptimizethesecontinuous or discrete hyper-parameters. In conclusion, when tuning a ML model to achieve high model performanceandlowcomputationalcosts, themostsuitableHPOalgorithmshould be selected based on the properties of its hyper-parameters. 39 6. Existing HPO Frameworks TotackleHPOproblems,manyopen-sourcelibrariesexisttoapplytheory into practice and lower the threshold for ML developers. In this section, we provide a brief introduction to some popular open-source HPO libraries or frameworks mainly for Python programming. The principles behind the involved optimization algorithms are provided in Section 4. 6.1. Sklearn Insklearn[31], ’GridSearchCV’canbeimplementedtodetecttheoptimal hyper-parameters using the GS algorithm. Each hyper-parameter value in the human-defined configuration space is evaluated by the program, with its performance evaluated using cross-validation. When all the instances in the configuration space have been evaluated, the optimal hyper-parameter combination in the defined search space with its performance score will be returned. ’RandomizedSearchCV’ is also provided in sklearn to implement a RS method. It evaluates a pre-defined number of randomly-selected hyperparameter values in parallel. Cross-validation is conducted to effectively evaluate the performance of each configuration. 6.2. Spearmint Spearmint [87] is a library using Bayesian optimization with the Gaussian process as the surrogate model. Spearmint’s primary deficiency is that it is not very efficient for categorical and conditional hyper-parameters. 6.3. BayesOpt Bayesian Optimization (BayesOpt) [109] is a Python library employed to solve HPO problems using BO. BayesOpt uses a Gaussian process as its surrogate model to calculate the objective function based on past evaluations and utilizes an acquisition function to determine the next values. 6.4. Hyperopt Hyperopt [110] is a HPO framework that involves RS and BO-TPE as the optimization algorithms. Unlike some of the other libraries that only support a single model, Hyperopt is able to use multiple models to model hierarchical hyper-parameters. In addition, Hyperopt is parallelizable since itusesMongoDbasthecentraldatabasetostorethehyper-parametercombinations. Hyperopt-sklearn [111] and hyperas [112] are the two libraries that can apply Hyperopt to scikit-learn and Keras libraries. 40 6.5. SMAC SMAC [90][113] is another library that uses BO with random forest as the surrogate model. It supports categorical, continuous, and discrete variables. 6.6. BOHB BOHB framework [97] is a combination of Bayesian optimization and Hyperband [15]. It overcomes one limitation of Hyperband, in that it randomly generates the test configurations, by replacing this procedure by BO. TPE is used as the surrogate model to store and model function evaluations. Using BOHB to evaluate the instance can achieve a trade-off between model performance and the current budget. 6.7. Optunity Optunity[83]isapopularHPOframeworkthatprovidesseveraloptimizationtechniques, includingGS,RS,PSO,andBO-TPE.InOptunity, categoricalhyper-parametersareconvertedtodiscretehyper-parametersbyindexing, and discrete hyper-parameters are processed as continuous hyper-parameters by rounding them; as such, it supports all types of hyper-parameters. 6.8. Skopt Skopt (scikit-optimize) [114] is a HPO library that is built on top of the scikit-learn [31] library. It implements several sequential model-based optimization models, including RS and BO-GP. The methods exhibit good performance with small search space and proper initialization. 6.9. GpFlowOpt GpFlowOpt [115] is a Python library for BO using GP as the surrogate model. It supports running BO-GP on GPU using the Tensorflow library. Therefore, GpFlowOpt is a good choice if BO is used in deep learning models with GPU resources available. 6.10. Talos Talos [116] is a Python package designed for hyper-parameter optimization with Keras models. Talos can be fully deployed into any Keras models and implemented easily without learning any new syntax. Several optimization techniques, including GS,