JournalofMachineLearningResearch24(2023)1-120 Submitted7/21;Revised4/23;Published5/23 Asymptotics of Network Embeddings Learned via Subsampling Andrew Davison ad3395@columbia.edu Department of Statistics Columbia University New York, NY 10027-5927, USA Morgane Austern morgane.austern@gmail.com Department of Statistics Harvard University Cambridge, MA 02138-2901, USA Editor: Tina Eliassi-Rad Abstract Network data are ubiquitous in modern machine learning, with tasks of interest including node classification, node clustering and link prediction. A frequent approach begins by learning an Euclidean embedding of the network, to which algorithms developed for vector-valued data are applied. For large networks, embeddings are learned using stochastic gradient methods where the sub-sampling scheme can be freely chosen. Despite the strong empirical performance of such methods, they are not well understood theoretically. Our work encapsulates representation methods using a subsampling approach, such as node2vec, into a single unifying framework. We prove, under the assumption that the graph is exchangeable, that the distribution of the learned embedding vectors asymptotically decouples. Moreover, we characterize the asymptotic distribution and provided rates ofconvergence,intermsofthelatentparameters,whichincludesthechoiceoflossfunction and the embedding dimension. This provides a theoretical foundation to understand what theembeddingvectorsrepresentandhowwellthesemethodsperformondownstreamtasks. Notably, we observe that typically used loss functions may lead to shortcomings, such as a lack of Fisher consistency. Keywords: networks, embeddings, representation learning, graphons, subsampling 1 Introduction Network data are commonplace in modern-day data analysis tasks. Some examples of network data include social networks detailing interactions between users, citation and knowledge networks between academic papers, and protein-protein interaction networks, where the presence of an edge indicates that two proteins in a common cell interact with eachother. Withsuchdata,thereareseveraltypesoftaskswemaybeinterestedin. Within a citation network, we can classify different papers as belonging to particular subfields (a community detection task; e.g Fortunato, 2010; Fortunato and Hric, 2016). In proteinprotein interaction networks, it is too costly to examine whether every protein pair will interacttogether(Qietal.,2006),andsogivenapartiallyobservednetworkweareinterested ©2023AndrewDavisonandMorganeAustern. License: CC-BY4.0,seehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Attributionrequirementsareprovided athttp://jmlr.org/papers/v24/21-0841.html. 3202 yaM 71 ]LM.tats[ 4v36320.7012:viXra Davison and Austern in predicting the values of the unobserved edges. As users join a social network, they are recommended individuals who they could interact with (Hasan and Zaki, 2011). A highly successful approach to solve network prediction tasks is to first learn an embedding or latent representation of the network into some manifold, usually a Euclidean space. A classical way of doing so is to perform principal component analysis or dimension reduction on the Laplacian of the adjacency matrix of the network (Belkin and Niyogi, 2003). This originates from spectral clustering methods (Pothen et al., 1990; Shi and Malik, 2000; Ng et al., 2001), where a clustering algorithm is applied to the matrix formed with the eigenvectors corresponding to the top k-eigenvalues of a Laplacian matrix. One shortcoming is that for large data sets, computing the SVD of a large matrix to obtain the eigenvectors becomes increasingly computationally restrictive. Approaches which scale better for larger data sets originate from natural language processing (NLP). DeepWalk (Perozzi et al., 2014) and node2vec (Grover and Leskovec, 2016) are both network embedding methods which apply embedding methods designed for NLP, by treating various types of random walks on a graph as “sentences”, with nodes as “words” within a vocabulary. We refer to Hamilton et al. (2017b) and Cai et al. (2018) for comprehensive overviews of algorithms for creating network embeddings. See Agrawal et al. (2021) for a discussion on how such embedding methods are related to other classical methods such as multidimensional scaling, and embedding methods for other data types. To obtain an embedding of the network, each node or vertex of the network (say u) is representedbyasingled-dimensionalvectorω ∈ Rd,whicharelearnedbyminimizingaloss u function between features of the network and the collection of embedding vectors. There are several benefits to this approach. As the learned embeddings capture latent information of each node through a Euclidean vector, we can use traditional machine learning methods (suchaslogisticregression)toperformadownstreamtask. Thefactthattheembeddingslie within a Euclidean space also means that they are amenable to (stochastic) gradient based optimization. One important point is that, unlike in an i.i.d setting where subsamples are essentially always obtained via sampling uniformly at random, here there is substantial freedom in the way in which subsampling is performed. Veitch et al. (2018) shows that this choice has a significant influence in downstream task performance. Despite their applied success, our current theoretical understanding of methods such as node2vec are lacking. We currently lack quantitative descriptions of what the embedding vectors represent and the information they contain, which has implications for whether the learned embeddings can be useful for downstream tasks. We also do not have quantitative descriptions for how the choice of subsampling scheme affects learned representations. The contributions of our paper in addressing this are threefold: a) Under the assumption that the observed network arises from an exchangeable graph, we describe the limiting distribution of the embeddings learned via procedures which depend on minimizing losses formed over random subsamples of a network, such as node2vec (Grover and Leskovec, 2016).