i j n i j E W f˜ (λ ,λ ,0) = l(k+1) (cid:8) W(λ ,·)W(λ ,·)α+W(λ ,·)αW(λ ,·) (cid:9) ·(1−ρ W(λ ,λ )). n i j i j i j n i j E E (α) W W In particular, we have that f˜ (λ ,λ ,1) is free of ρ , and n i j n f˜ (λ ,λ ,0) = l(k+1) (cid:8) W(λ ,·)W(λ ,·)α+W(λ ,·)αW(λ ,·) (cid:9) ·(1+O(ρ )) n i j i j i j n E E (α) W W Remark 28 We note that in algorithmic implementations of negative sampling schemes in practice, there is usually not an explicit check for whether the negatively sampled edges are non-edges in the original graph. This is done for the reason that graphs encountered in the real world are frequently sparse, and so the check would take up computational time while only having a small effect on the learnt embeddings. This would correspond to removing the (1−ρ W(λ ,λ )) factor in the above formula for f˜ (λ ,λ ,1), and so Lemma 27 reaffirms n i j n i j the above reasoning. 4.1 Expectations and variances of random-walk based gradient estimates Throughout we have studied the empirical risk R (ω ,...,ω ) induced through using a n 1 n stochastic gradient scheme to learn a network embedding, given a subsampling scheme S(G). Subsampling schemes used by practitioners (such as in node2vec) depend on some choice of hyperparameters. These are selected either via a grid-search, or by using default suggestions - for example, the unigram sampler in Algorithm 4 is commonly used with 28 Asymptotics of Network Embeddings Learned via Subsampling α = 0.75, as recommended in Mikolov et al. (2013). A priori, the role of such parameters is not obvious, and so we give some insights into the role of particular hyperparameters within the random walk scheme described in Algorithm 4. We focus on the expected value and variance of the gradient estimates used during training. To illustrate the importance of these two values, we discuss first what happens in a traditional empirical risk minimization setting, where given data x ,...,x ∈ Rp where n 1 n is large and a loss function L(x;θ), we try to optimize over θ the empirical loss function L (θ) := (cid:80)n L(x ;θ) by using a stochastic gradient scheme. More specifically, we obtain n i=1 i a sequence (θ ) via t t≥1 θ = θ −η G where E[G ] = ∇L (θ) t t−1 t t t n given an initial point θ , step sizes η and a random gradient estimate G . We then run this 0 t t for a sufficiently large number of iterations t such that θ ≈ argmin L (θ); see e.g Robbins t θ n and Monro (1951). For the empirical risk minimization setting detailed above, one common approach has G take the form t m 1 (cid:88) G = ∇L(x˜ ;θ ) t m t−1 m l=1 where x˜ are sampled i.i.d uniformly from {x ,...,x } for each l ∈ [m]. We then get l 1 n E[G ] = ∇L (θ ) for any choice of m, and Var((cid:107)G (cid:107) ) = O(m−1) when assuming that the t n t−1 t 2 gradient of L is bounded. In general, the variance of the gradient estimates determines the speed of convergence of a stochastic gradient scheme - the smaller the variance, the quicker the convergence (Dekel et al., 2012) - and so choosing a larger batch size k should leave to better convergence. Importantly, when comparing two gradient estimates, we cannot make a bona-fide comparison of their variances without ensuring that they have similar expectations, as otherwise the two schemes are optimizing different empirical risks. Inthenetworkembeddingsetting,toformagradientestimatewecouldtakeindependent subsamples S (G),...,S (G) and average over these, to get an estimator which (when 1 m averaging over the subsampling process) gives an unbiased estimator of the gradient of the empirical risk R (ω ,...,ω ). This also has the variance of the gradient estimates n 1 n decaying as O(m−1). A more interesting question is to study what occurs when we only use one subsampling scheme S(G) per gradient estimate - as in practice - and vary the hyperparameters. Forexample,intherandomwalkschemeAlgorithm4,asaconsequenceof Proposition26,undertheassumptionsofTheorem12,thematrixB(ω ,ω )isapproximately (cid:98)i (cid:98)j equal to (cid:16) 2W(λ ,λ )E (α)(1+k−1)−1 (cid:17) K∗ (λ ,λ ) = log i j W , n,uc i j l(1−ρ W(λ ,λ ))·{W(λ ,·)W(λ ,·)α+W(λ ,·)αW(λ ,·)} n i j i j i j which is essentially free of the random walk length k once k is sufficiently large. A natural question is to therefore ask what the role of k is in such a setting. In the result below, we highlight that the role of k leads to producing gradient estimates