to the second part of Q3. We later demonstrate that making this change can lead to improved performance when using the learned embeddings for downstream tasks on real data (Section 5.2), suggesting these findings are not just an artefact of just the type of models we consider. 1.3 Related works There is a large literature looking at embeddings formed via spectral clustering methods under various network models from a statistical perspective; see e.g Ma et al. (2021); Deng et al. (2021) for some recent examples. For models supporting a natural community structure, these frequently take the form of giving guarantees on the behavior of the embeddings, and then argue that using a clustering method with the embedding vectors allows for weak/strong consistency of community detection. See Abbe (2017) for an overview of the information theoretic thresholds for the different type of recovery guarantees. Lei and Rinaldo (2015) consider spectral clustering using the eigenvectors of the adjacency matrix for a stochastic block model. Rubin-Delanchy et al. (2017) consider spectral embeddings using both the adjacency matrix and Laplacian matrices from models arising from generative models of the form A |X ,X ∼ Bernoulli((cid:104)X ,I X (cid:105)) where ij i j i p,q j I = diag(I ,−I )) and the X ∈ Rd are i.i.d random variables with p,q,d known and p,q p q i fixed - such graphs are referred to frequently as dot product graphs. These allow for a broader class of models than stochastic block models, such as mixed-membership models. The q = 0 case was considered by Tang and Priebe (2018), with central limit theorem results given in Levin et al. (2021); see Athreya et al. (2018) for a broader review of statistical analyses of various methods on these graphs. In Lei (2021), they consider similar models where A |Z ,Z ∼ Bernoulli((cid:104)Z ,Z (cid:105) ) where K is a Krein space (formally, this is a direct ij i j i j K sum of Hilbert spaces equipped with an indefinite inner product, formed by taking the difference of the inner products on the summand Hilbert spaces), with their results applying 9 Davison and Austern to non-negative definite graphons and graphons which are H¨older continuous for exponents β > 1/2. They then discuss the estimation of the Z using the eigendecomposition of the i adjacency matrix (which we have noted can be viewed as a type of embedding) from a functional data analysis perspective. We note that in our work we do not directly assume a model of such a form, but some of our proofs use some similar ideas. With regards to embeddings learned via random walk approaches such as node2vec (Grover and Leskovec, 2016), there are a few works which study modified loss functions. To be precise, these suppose that each vertex u has two embedding vectors ω ∈ Rd and u η ∈ Rd, with terms of the form (cid:104)ω ,ω (cid:105) replaced in the loss with (cid:104)ω ,η (cid:105), and ω , η are u i j i j u u allowed to vary independently with each other. Qiu et al. (2018) study several different embedding methods within this context (including those involving random walks) where they explicitly write down the closed form of the minimizing matrix ((cid:104)ω ,η (cid:105)) for the loss i j ij having averaged over the random walk process when d ≥ n and n is fixed. In order to be always able to write down explicitly the minimizing matrix, they rely on the assumption thatd ≥ nandthatη andω areunconstrainedofeachother,sothatthematrix((cid:104)ω ,η (cid:105)) j j i j ij is unconstrained. This avoids the issues of non-convexity in the problem. We note that in our work we are able to handle the case where we enforce the constraints η = ω (as in the j j original node2vec paper) and d (cid:28) n, so we address the non-convexity. ZhangandTang(2021)thenconsidersthesameminimizingmatrixasinQiuetal.(2018) for stochastic block models, and examines the best rank d approximation (with respect to the Frobenius norm) to this matrix, in the regime where n → ∞ and d is less than or equal to the number of communities. We comment that our work gives convergence guarantees under broad families of sampling schemes, including - but not limited to - those involving random walks, and for general smooth graphons rather than only stochastic block models. Veitchetal.(2018)discussestheroleofsubsamplingasamodelchoice,withinthecontextof specifying stochastic gradient schemes for empirical risk minimization for learning network representations, and highlights the role they play in empirical performance. 1.4 Notation and nomenclature For this section, we write µ for the Lebesgue measure, int(A) the interior of a set A and cl(A) as the closure of A. We say that a partition Q of X ⊆ Rd, written Q = (Q ,...,Q ), 1 κ isafinitecollectionofpairwisedisjoint, connectedsetswhoseunionisX, andµ(int(Q)) > 0 and µ(cl(Q)\int(Q)) = 0 for