mizers where there is currently little understanding: Q1: To what extent is there a unique minimizer to the empirical risk (2)? Q2: Does the distribution of the learnt embedding vectors (ω ,...,ω ) change as a result (cid:98)1 (cid:98)n of changing the underlying sampling scheme? If so, can we describe quantitatively how? Q3: During learning of the embedding vectors, are we using a loss which limits the information we can capture in a learned representation? If so, can we fix this in some way? Answering these questions allow us to evaluate the impact of various heuristic choices made in the design of algorithms such as node2vec, where our results will allow us to describe the impact with respect to downstream tasks such as edge prediction. We go into more depth into these questions below, and discuss in Section 1.5 how our main results help address these questions. 1.1.1 Uniqueness of minimizers of the empirical risk We highlight that the loss and risk functions in (1) and (2) are invariant under any joint transformation of the embedding vectors ω → Qω by an orthogonal matrix Q. As a result, i i we can at most ask whether the gram matrix Ω = (cid:104)ω ,ω (cid:105) induced by the embedding ij i j vectors is uniquely characterized. This is challenging as the embedding dimension d is significantly less than the number of vertices n - even for networks involving millions of nodes, the embedding dimensions used by practitioners are of the order of magnitude of hundreds. As a result the gram matrix is rank constrained. Consequently, when reformulating (2) to optimize over the matrix Ω, the optimization domain is non-convex, meaning answering this question is non-trivial. Answering this allows us to understand whether the embedding dimension fundamentally influences the representation we are learning, or instead only influences how accurately we can learn such a representation. 1.1.2 Dependence of embeddings on the sampling scheme choice in learning Whileweknowthatrandom-walkschemessuchasnode2vecareempiricallysuccessful,there has been little discussion as to how the representation learnt by such schemes compares to (forexample)schemeswherewesampleverticesrandomlyandlookattheinducedsubgraph. This is useful for understanding their performance on downstream tasks such as community detection or link prediction. Another useful example is for when embeddings are used for causal inference (Veitch et al., 2019), where there is the needed to validate assumptions that the embeddings containing information relevant to the prediction of propensity scores and expected outcomes. A final example arises in methods which try and attempt to “debias” embeddings through the use of adaptive sampling schemes (Rahman et al., 2019), to understand what extent they satisfy different fairness criteria. We are also interested in understanding how the hyperparameters of a sampling scheme affect the expected value and variance of gradient estimates when performing stochastic 4 Asymptotics of Network Embeddings Learned via Subsampling gradient descent. The distinction is important, as the expected value influences the empirical risk being minimized - therefore the underlying representation - and the variance the speed at which an optimization algorithm converges (Dekel et al., 2012). When using stochastic gradient descent in an i.i.d data setting, the mini-batch size does not effect the expectedvalueofthegradientestimategiventheobserveddata,butonlyitsvariance,which decreases as the mini-batch size increases. However, for a scheme like node2vec, it is not clear whether hyperparameters such as the random walk length, or the unigram parameter affect the expectation or variance of the gradient estimates (conditional on the graph G). 1.1.3 Information-limiting loss functions Oneimportantpropertyofrepresentationswhichmakethemusefulfordownstreamtasksare their ability to differentiate between different graph structures. One way to examine this is to consider different probabilistic models for a network, and to then examine whether the resulting embeddings are distinguishable from each other. If they are not, then this suggests some information about the network has been lost in learning the representation. By examining the range of distributions which have the same learned representation, we can understand this information loss and the effect on downstream task performance. 1.2 Overview of results 1.2.1 Embedding methods implicitly fit graphon models We highlight that the loss in (2) is the same as the loss obtained by maximizing the loglikelihood formed by a probabilistic model for the network of the form (cid:0) (cid:1) a |ω ,ω ∼ Bernoulli σ((cid:104)ω ,ω (cid:105)) independently for i (cid:54)= j ij i j i j (3) ω ∼ Unif(C) independently for i ∈ [n], i usingstochasticgradientascent. HereC ⊆ Rd isaclosedsetcorrespondingtoaconstrained set for the embedding vectors. In the limit as the number of vertices increases to infinity, suchamodelcorrespondstoanexchangeablegraph(Lov´asz,2012),astheinfiniteadjacency matrices are invariant to a permutation of the labels of the vertices. In an exchangeable graph, each vertex u has a latent feature λ ∼ Unif[0,1], with u edges arising independently with a |λ ,λ ∼ Bernoulli(W(λ ,λ )) for a function W : uv u v u v [0,1]2 → [0,1] called a graphon; see Lov´asz (2012) for an overview. Such models can