We currently lack quantitative descriptions of what the embedding vectors represent and the information they contain, which has implications for whether the learned embeddings can be useful for downstream tasks. We also do not have quantitative descriptions for how the choice of subsampling scheme affects learned representations. The contributions of our paper in addressing this are threefold: a) Under the assumption that the observed network arises from an exchangeable graph, we describe the limiting distribution of the embeddings learned via procedures which depend on minimizing losses formed over random subsamples of a network, such as node2vec (Grover and Leskovec, 2016). The limiting distribution depends both on the underlying model of the graph and the choice of subsampling scheme, and we describe it explicitly for common choices of subsampling schemes, such as uniform edge sampling (Tang et al., 2015) or random-walk samplers (Perozzi et al., 2014; Grover and Leskovec, 2016). 2 Asymptotics of Network Embeddings Learned via Subsampling b) Embedding methods are frequently learned via minimizing losses which depend on the embedding vectors only through their pairwise inner products. We show that this restricts the class of networks for which an informative embedding can be learned, and that networks generated from distinct probabilistic models can have embeddings which are asymptotically indistinguishable. We also show that this can be fixed by changing the loss to use an indefinite or Krein inner product between the embedding vectors. We illustrate on real data that doing so can lead to improved performance in downstream tasks. c) We show that for sampling schemes based upon performing random walks on the graph,thelearnedembeddingsarescale-invariantinthefollowingsense. Supposethat we have two identical copies of a network generated from a sparsified exchangeable graph, and on one we delete each edge with probability p ∈ (0,1). Then in the limit as the number of vertices increases to infinity, the asymptotic distributions of the embeddingvectorstrainedonthetwonetworkswillbeasymptoticallydistinguishable. We highlight that this may provide some explanation as to the desirability of using random walk based methods for learning embeddings of sparse networks. 1.1 Motivation We note that several approaches to learn network embeddings (Perozzi et al., 2014; Tang et al., 2015; Grover and Leskovec, 2016) do so by performing stochastic gradient updates of the embedding vectors ω ∈ Rd by updates i ∂L (cid:88) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:88) (cid:8) (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:9) ω ←− ω −η where L = − logσ (cid:104)ω ,ω (cid:105) − log 1−σ (cid:104)ω ,ω (cid:105) . (1) i i i j i j ∂ω i (i,j)∈P (i,j)∈N Here σ(x) = (1 + e−x)−1 is the sigmoid function, the sets P and N are pairs of nodes which are chosen randomly at each iteration (referred to as positive and negative samples respectively) and η > 0 is a step size. The goal of the objective is to force pairs of vertices within P to be close in the embedding space, and those within N to be far apart. At the most basic level, we could just have that P consists of edges within the graph and N non-edges, so that vertices which are disconnected from each other are further apart in the embedding space than those which are connected. In a scheme such as node2vec, P arises through a random walk on the network, and N arises by choosing vertices according to a unigram negative sampling distribution for each vertex in the random walk P. Forsimplicity, assumethattheonlyinformationavailablefortrainingisafullyobserved adjacency matrix (a ) of a network G of size n. Moreover, we let P and N be random ij i,j sets which consist only of pairs of vertices which are connected (a = 1) and not connected ij (a = 0) respectively. In this case, if we write S(G) = P ∪N, then the algorithm scheme ij described in (1) arises from trying to minimize the empirical risk function (which depends on the underlying graph G) R (ω ,...,ω ) := (cid:88) P(cid:0) (i,j) ∈ S(G)|G (cid:1) (cid:96) (cid:0) (cid:104)ω ,ω (cid:105),a (cid:1) (2) n 1 n i j ij i(cid:54)=j withastochasticoptimizationscheme(RobbinsandMonro,1951), wherewewrite(cid:96)(y,x) = −xlogσ(y)−(1−x)log(1−σ(y)) for the cross entropy loss. 3 Davison and Austern Thismeansthattheoptimizationschemein(1)attemptstofindaminimizer(ω ,...,ω ) (cid:98)1 (cid:98)n of the function R (ω ,...,ω ) defined in (2). We ask several questions about these minin 1 n mizers where there is currently little understanding: Q1: To what extent is there a unique minimizer to the empirical risk (2)? Q2: Does the distribution of the learnt embedding vectors (ω ,...,ω ) change as a result (cid:98)1 (cid:98)n of changing the underlying sampling scheme? If so, can we describe quantitatively how? Q3: During learning of the embedding vectors, are we using a loss which limits the information we can capture in a learned representation? If so, can we fix this in some way? Answering these questions allow us to evaluate the impact of various heuristic choices made in the