i j i j (3) ω ∼ Unif(C) independently for i ∈ [n], i usingstochasticgradientascent. HereC ⊆ Rd isaclosedsetcorrespondingtoaconstrained set for the embedding vectors. In the limit as the number of vertices increases to infinity, suchamodelcorrespondstoanexchangeablegraph(Lov´asz,2012),astheinfiniteadjacency matrices are invariant to a permutation of the labels of the vertices. In an exchangeable graph, each vertex u has a latent feature λ ∼ Unif[0,1], with u edges arising independently with a |λ ,λ ∼ Bernoulli(W(λ ,λ )) for a function W : uv u v u v [0,1]2 → [0,1] called a graphon; see Lov´asz (2012) for an overview. Such models can be thought of as generalizations of a stochastic block model (Holland et al., 1983), which have a correspondence to when the function W is a piecewise constant function on sets A ×A i j for some partition (A ) of [0,1], with the partitions acting as the different communities i i∈[k] within the SBM. If π is the size of A , and we write W for the value of W(l,l(cid:48)) on A ×A , i i ij i j this is equivalent to the usual presentation of a stochastic block model i.i.d indep c(u) ∼ Categorical(π), a |c(u),c(v) ∼ Bernoulli(W ). (4) uv c(u),c(v) wherec(i)isthecommunitylabelofvertexu. Onecanalsoconsidersparsifiedexchangeable graphs, where for a graph on n vertices, edges are generated with probability W (λ ,λ ) = n u v ρ W(λ ,λ ) for a graphon W and a sparsity factor ρ → 0 as n → ∞. This accounts for n u v n 5 Davison and Austern the fact that most real world graphs are not “dense” and do not have the number of edges scaling as O(n2); in a sparsified graphon, the number of edges now scales as O(ρ n2). n For the purposes of theoretical analysis, we look at the minimizers of (2) when the network G arises as a finite sample observation from a sparsified exchangeable graph whose graphonissufficientlyregular. Wethenexaminestatisticallythebehavioroftheminimizers asthenumberofverticesgrowstowardsinfinity. Asembeddingmethodsarefrequentlyused on very large networks, a large sample statistical analysis is well suited for this task. One importantobservationisthateven when the observed data is from a sparse graph, embedding methods which fall under (3) are implicitly fitting a dense model to the data. As we know empirically that embedding methods such as node2vec produce useful representations in sparse settings, we introduce the sparsity to allow some insight as to how this can occur. 1.2.2 Types of results obtained We now discuss our main results, with a general overview followed by explicit examples. In Theorems 10 and 19, we show that under regularity assumptions on the graphon, in the limit as the number of vertices increases to infinity, we have for any sequence of minimizers (ω ,...,ω ) to R (ω ,...,ω ) that (cid:98)1 (cid:98)n n 1 n 1 (cid:88)(cid:12) (cid:12) n2 (cid:12)(cid:104)ω (cid:98)i ,ω (cid:98)j (cid:105)−K(λ i ,λ j )(cid:12) = O p (r n ) (5) i,j forafunctionK : [0,1]2 → Rwedetermine, andrater → 0. BothK andr dependonthe n n graphon W and the choice of sampling scheme. The rate also depends on the embedding dimension d; we note that our results may sometimes require d → ∞ as n → ∞ in order for r → 0, but will always do so sub-linearly with n. As a result (5) allows us to guarantee n that on average, the inner products between embedding vectors contain some information abouttheunderlyingstructureofthegraph,asparameterizedthroughthegraphonfunction W. One notable application of this type of result is that it allows us to give guarantees for the asymptotic risk on edge prediction tasks, when using the values S = (cid:104)ω ,ω (cid:105) as ij (cid:98)i (cid:98)j scores to threshold for whether there is the presence of an edge (i,j) in the graph. Our resultsapplytosparsifiedexchangeablegraphswhosegraphonsareeitherpiecewiseconstant (corresponding to a stochastic block model), or piecewise H¨older continuous. ToshowhowourresultsaddressthequestionsintroducedinSection1.1,andtohighlight the connection with using the embedding vectors for edge prediction tasks, we give explicit examples (with minimal additiional notation) of results which can be obtained from the main theorems of the paper. For the remainder of the section, suppose that (cid:16) ey (cid:17) (cid:96)(y,x) := −xlog(σ(y))−(1−x)log(1−σ(y)) with σ(y) = 1+ey denotes the cross-entropy loss function (where y ∈ R and x ∈ {0,1}). We consider graphs which arise from a sub-family of stochastic block models - frequently called SBM(p,q,κ) models - where a graph of size n is generated via the probabilistic model (cid:40) Bernoulli(ρ p) if c(u) = c(v), i.i.d indep n c(u) ∼ Unif({1,...,κ}), a |c(u),c(v) ∼ (6) uv Bernoulli(ρ q) if c(u) (cid:54)= c(v). n 6 Asymptotics of Network Embeddings Learned via Subsampling Here ρ is a sparsifying sequence. For our results below, we will consider the cases when n ρ = 1 or ρ = (logn)2/n (so ρ → 0 in the second case). With regards to the choice of n n n sampling schemes,