(Y ). We use similar notation for O (·), ω (·) (where X = ω (Y ) iff Y = n,k p n,k p p n p n n o (X )), Ω (·) (where X = Ω (Y ) iff Y = O (X )) and Θ (·) (where X = Θ (Y ) iff p n p n p n n p n p n p n X = O (Y ) and Y = O (X )). For non-stochastic quantities, we use similar notation, n p n n p n except that we drop the subscript p. Throughout, we use the notation |·| to denote the measure of sets; specifically, if A ⊆ N then |A| is the number of elements of the set A, and if A ⊆ R then |A| or µ(A) is the Lebesgue measure of the set A. Similarly, for sequences and functions, we use (cid:107)·(cid:107) to denote the (cid:96) or Lp norms respectively. The notation [n] p p indicates the set of integers {1,...,n}. 11 Davison and Austern 1.5 Outline of paper In Section 2, we discuss the main object of study in the paper, and the assumptions we require throughout. The assumptions concern the data generating process of the observed network, the behavior of the subsampling scheme used, and the properties of the loss functionusedtolearnembeddingvectors. Section3consistofthemaintheoreticalresultsofthe paper,givingaconsistencyresultforthelearnedembeddingvectorsunderdifferentsubsampling schemes. Section 4 gives examples of subsampling schemes which our approach allows us to analyze, and highlights a scale invariance property of subsampling schemes which perform random walks on a graph. In Section 5, we demonstrate on real data the benefit in usinganindefiniteorKreininnerproductbetweenembeddingvectors, anddemonstratethe validity of our theoretical results on simulated data. Proofs are deferred to the appendix, with a brief outline of the ideas used for the main results given in Appendix B. 2 Framework of analysis We consider the problem of minimizing the empirical risk function R n (ω 1 ,...,ω n ) = (cid:88) P(cid:0) (i,j) ∈ S(G n ) (cid:12) (cid:12)G n (cid:1) (cid:96)(B(ω i ,ω j ),a ij ) (9) i,j∈[n],i(cid:54)=j where we have that i) the embedding vectors ω ∈ Rd are d-dimensional (where d is allowed to grow with i n), with ω corresponding to the embedding of vertex i of the graph; i ii) (cid:96) : R×{0,1} → [0,∞) is a non-negative loss function; iii) B : Rd×Rd → R is a (bilinear) similarity measure between embedding vectors; and iv) S(G )referstoastochasticsubsamplingschemeofthegraphG , withG representing n n n a graph on n vertices. We now discuss our assumptions for the analysis of this object, which relate to a generative modelofthegraphG ,thelossfunctionused,andthepropertiesofthesubsamplingscheme. n For purposes of readability, we first provide a simplified set of assumptions, and give a general set of assumptions for which our theoretical results hold in Appendix A. 2.1 Data generating process of the network We begin by imposing some regularity conditions on the data generating process of the network. Recall that we assume the graphs (G ) are generated from a graphon process n n≥1 with latent variables λ i. ∼ i.d Unif[0,1] and generating graphon W (l,l(cid:48)) = ρ W(l,l(cid:48)), where i n n W is a graphon and ρ is a sparsity factor which may shrink to zero as n → ∞. n Remark 4 The above assumption corresponds to the graph G being an exchangeable graph. n Parameterizing such graphs through a graphon W : [0,1]2 → R and one dimensional latent variables λ ∼ U[0,1] is a canonical choice as a result of the Aldous-Hoover theorem (e.g i Aldous, 1981), and is extensive in the network analysis literature. However, this is not the 12 Asymptotics of Network Embeddings Learned via Subsampling only possible choice for the latent space. More generally we could consider some probability measure Q on Rq, and a symmetric measurable function W(cid:102) : (Rq)2 → [0,1], where the graph is generated by assigning a latent variable λ˜ ∼ Q independently for each vertex, and then i joining vertices i < j with an edge independently of each other with probability W(cid:102)(λ˜ i ,λ˜ j ). From a modelling perspective a higher dimensional latent space is desirable; an interesting fact is that any such graph is equivalent in law to one drawn from a graphon with latent variables λ ∼ U[0,1] (Janson, 2009, Theorem 7.1). As a simple illustration of this i fact, suppose that users in a social network graph have characteristics x ∈ {0,1}q for some i q ∈ N, and that two individuals i and j are connected in the network (independently of any other pair of users) with probability W(cid:102)(x i ,x j ), which depends only on their characteristics. Assuming that the x are drawn i.i.d from a distribution p(x) on [0,1]q, we can always i simulate such a distribution by partitioning