j ˇ , (3.12) i“1 j“1 where the weights are defined as ` ˘ w´1 “ MI Y,X | tS ,...,S u . (3.13) j j 1 q The adaptive penalization in (3.12) acts as a bias-mitigation mechanism by dropping (that is, heavily penalizing) the variables with very low safety-indices. This whole procedure can be easily implemented using the penalty.factor argument of glmnet R-package (Friedman et al., 2010). No doubt a similar strategy can be adopted for other regularized methods such asridgeorelastic-net. Foranexcellentreviewondifferentkindsofregularizationprocedures, see Hastie (2020). 34 Remark19. AfulllassoonXselectsthestrongsurrogates(variablesfamilyandeducation) as some of the top features due to their high predictive power, and hence carries enhanced risk of being discriminatory. On the other hand, an infogram-guided FINElasso provides an automatic defense mechanism for combating bias without significantly compromising accuracy. Remark 20 (Towards A Systematic Recipe). This idea of data-adaptive ‘re-weighting’ as a bias mitigation strategy, can be easily translated to other types of machine learning models. For example, to incorporate fairness into the traditional random forest method, choose splitting variables at each node by performing weighted random sampling. The selection probability is determined by F ř j Prpselecting variable X q “ , (3.14) j F j j where the F-values F is defined in equation (3.6). This can be easily operationalized using j the mtry.select.prob argument of the randomForest() function in iRF R-package. Following this line of thought, one can (re)design a variety of less-discriminatory ML techniques without changing a single architecture of the original algorithms. 4 Conclusion Faced with the profound changes that AI technologies can produce, pressure for “more” and “tougher” regulation is probably inevitable. (Stone et al., 2019). Over the last 60 years or so—since the early 1960s—there’s been an explosion of powerful ML algorithms with increasing predictive performance. However, the challenge for the next few decades will be to develop sound theoretical principles and computational mechanisms that transform those conventional ML methods into more safe, reliable, and trustworthy ones. The fact of the matter is that doing machine learning in a ‘responsible’ way is much harder than developing another complex ML technique. A highly accurate algorithm that does not comply with regulations is (or will soon be) unfit for deployment, especially in safetycritical areas that directly affect human lives. For example, the Algorithmic Accountability Act14 (see Appx. A.2) introduced in April 2019 requires large corporations (including tech companies, as well as banks, insurance, retailers, and many other consumer businesses) to be 14Alsosee,EU’s“ArtificialIntelligenceAct”releasedonApril21,2021,whosekeypointsaresummarized in Appendix A.8. 35 cognizant of the potential for biased decision-making due to algorithmic methods; otherwise, civil lawsuits can be filed against those firms. As a result, it is becoming necessary to develop tools and methods that can provide ways to enhance interpretability and efficiency of classical ML models while guarding against bias. With this goal in mind, this paper introducesanewkindofstatisticallearningtechnologyandinformation-theoreticautomated monitoring tools that can guide a modeler to quickly build “better” algorithms that are lessbiased, more-interpretable, and sufficiently accurate. One thing is clear: rather than being passive recipients of complex automated ML technologies, we need more general-purpose statistical risk management tools for algorithmic accountability and oversight. This is critical to the responsible adoption of regulatorycompliant AI-systems. This paper has taken some important steps towards this goal by introducing the concepts and principles of ‘Admissible Machine Learning.’ Acknowledgement The author thanks the editor, associate editor, and four anonymous reviewers for their helpful suggestions. I would like to specially thank Erin LeDell for bringing this problem to my attention. The author was benefited from many useful discussions with Michael Guerzhoy, Hany Farid, Julia Dressel, Beau Coker, and Hanchen Wang on demystifying some aspects of COMPASS data; Daniel Osei on the data pre-processing steps of Lending Club loan data. This research was supported by H2O.ai. References Allen, B., S. Agarwal, L. Coombs, C. Wald, and K. Dreyer (2021). 2020 ACR Data Science Institute Artificial Intelligence Survey. Journal of the American College of Radiology. Berrett, T. B., Y. Wang, R. F. Barber, and R. J. Samworth (2019). The conditional permutation test for independence while controlling for confounders. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology). Blattner, L. and S. Nelson (2021). How costly is noise? Data and disparities in consumer credit. arXiv preprint:2105.07554. 36 Breiman, L. et al. (2004). Population theory for boosting ensembles. The Annals of Statistics 32(1), 1–11. Brennan, T., W. Dieterich, and B. Ehret (2009). Evaluating the predictive validity of the compas risk and needs assessment system. Criminal Justice and Behavior 36(1), 21–40. Candes, E., Y. Fan, L. Janson, and J. Lv (2018). Panning for gold: ‘model-x’ knockoffs for high dimensional controlled variable selection. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 80(3), 551–577. Chouldechova, A. and A. Roth (2020). A snapshot of the frontiers of fairness in machine learning. Communications of the ACM 63(5), 82–89. Fahner, G. (2018). Developing