the UCI Credit Card data (discussed in more details in Sec 3.2.3), collected in October 2005, from an important Taiwan-based bank. We have records of n “ 30,000 cardholders. The data composed of a response variable Y denoting: default payment status (Yes = 1, No = 0), along with p “ 23 predictor variables (e.g., gender, education, age, historyofpastpayment, etc.). Thegoalistoaccuratelypredict the probability of default given the profile of a particular customer. On the surface, this seems to be a straightforward classification problem for which we have a large inventory of powerful algorithms. Yeh and Lien (2009) performed an exhaustive comparison between six machine learning methods (logistic regression, K-nearest neighbor, neuralnet, etc.) andfinallyselectedtheneuralnetworkmodel, whichattained83%accuracy on a 80-20 train-test split of the data. However, traditionally build ML models are not deployable, unless it is admissible under the financial regulatory constraints1 (Wall, 2018), which demand that (i) the method should not discriminate people on the basis of protective features2, here based on gender and age; and (ii) The method should be simpler to interpret and transparent (compared to those big neural-nets or ensemble models like random forest and gradient boosting). To improve fairness, one may remove the sensitive variables and go back to business as usual by fitting the model on the rest of the features–known as ‘fairness through unawareness.’ Obviously this is not going to work because there will be some proxy attributes (e.g, zip code or profession) that share some degree of correlation (information-sharing) with race, 1TheEqualCreditOpportunityAct(ECOA)isamajorfederalfinancialregulationlawenactedin1974. 2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protected group 3 Figure 1: A shallow admissible tree classifier for the UCI credit card data with four decision nodes, which is as accurate as the most complex state-of-the-art ML model. gender, or age. These proxy variables can then lead to the same unfair results. It is not clear how to define and detect those proxy variables to mitigate hidden biases in the data. In fact, on a recent review by Chouldechova and Roth (2020) on algorithmic fairness, the authors forthrightly stated “But despite the volume and velocity of published work, our understanding of the fundamental questions related to fairness and machine learning remain in its infancy.” Currently, there exists no systematic method to directly construct an admissible algorithm that can mitigate bias. To quote a real practitioner of a reputed AI-industry: “I ran 40,000 different random forest models with different features and hyper-parameters to search a fair model.” This ad-hoc and inefficient strategy could be a significant barrier for an efficient large-scale implementation of admissible AI technologies. Fig. 1 shows a fair and shallow tree classifier with four decision nodes, which attains 82.65% accuracy; this was built in a completely automated manner without any hand-crafted manual tuning. Section 2 will introduce the required theory and methods behind our procedure. Nevertheless, this simple and transparent anatomy of the final model makes it easy to convey which are the key drivers of the model: variables Pay 0 and Pay 23 are the most important indicators to 3Pay 0 and Pay 2 denote the repayment status of the last two months (-1=pay duly, 1=payment delay for one month, 2=payment delay for two months, and so on). 4 default. These variables have two key characteristics: they are highly predictive and at the same time safe to use in the sense that they share very little predictive information with the sensitive attributes age and gender, and for that reason, we call them admissible features. The model also convey how the key variables impacting credit risk: the simple decision tree shown in Fig. 1 is fairly self-explanatory, and its clarity facilitates an easy explanation of the predictions. Admissible ML for Science. Legal requirement is not the only reason why we want to build admissible ML. In scientific investigations, it is important to know whether the deployed algorithm helps researchers to better understand the phenomena by refining their “mental model.” Consider, for example, the prostate cancer data where we have p “ 6033 gene expression measurements from 52 tumor and 50 normal specimens. Fig. 2 shows a 95% accurate classification model for prostate data with only two “core” driver genes! This compactmodelisadmissibleinthesensethatitconfersthefollowingbenefits: (i)itidentifies a two-gene signature (composed of gene-1627 and gene-2327) as the top factor associated with prostate cancer. They are jointly overexpressed in the tumor samples but interestingly theyhaveverylittlemarginalinformation(notindividuallydifferentiallyexpressed,asshown in Fig. 6). Accordingly, traditional linear-model-based analysis will fail to detect this genepair as a key biomarker. (ii) The simple decision tree model in Fig. 2 provides a mechanistic understanding and justification as to why the algorithm thinks a patient has prostate cancer or not. (iii) Finally, it provides the needed guidance on what to do next by having a control over the system. In particular, a cancer biologist can choose between different diagnosis and treatment plans with the goal to regulate those two oncogenes. Goals and Organization. The