px q, i “ 1,...,n (3.5) ji j ji and work on the resulting U matrix instead of the original X . We do this transformanˆp nˆp tion for two reasons: first, to robustify, since it is known that gene expressions are inherently noisy. Second, to make it unit-free, since the raw gene expression values depend on the type 7To reduce unnecessary clutter, we have displayed the infogram using top 50 features, since the rest of the genes will be cramped inside the nonessential L-zone anyway. 16 Figure 6: Prostate data analysis. Top panel: the gbm-feature importance graph, along with the infogram for the top 50 genes. Bottom-left: the scatter plot of Gene 1627 vs. 2327. For clarity, we have plotted them in the quantile domain pu ,v q, where u “ rankpXr,1627sq{n i i and v “ rankpXr,2327sq{n. The black dots denote control samples with y “ 0 class and red triangles are prostate cancer samples with y “ 1 class. Bottom-right: the estimated CoreTree with just two decision-nodes, which is good enough to be 95% accurate. 17 of preprocessing, thus carries much less scientific meaning. On the other hand, percentiles are much more easily interpretable to convey “how overexpressed a gene is.” Step 3. Shallow Robust Tree. We build a single decision tree using the infogram-selected coregenes. This is displayed in the bottom-right panel of Fig. 6. Interestingly, the CoreTree retained only two genes t1627,2327u whose scatter plot (in the rank-transform domain) is shown in the bottom-left corner of Fig. 6. A simple eyeball estimate of the discrimination surfaces are shown in bold (black and red) lines, which closely matches with the decision tree rule. It is quite remarkable that we have reduced the original 6033-dimensional problem to a simple bivariate two-sample one, just by wisely selecting the features based on the infogram. Step 4. Stability. Note the tree that we build is based only on the infogram-selected core features. These features have less redundancy and high relevance, which provide an extraordinarystability(overdifferentrunsonthesamedataset)tothedecision-tree–ahighly desirable characteristic. Step 5. Accuracy. The accuracy of our single decision tree (on a randomly selected 20% test set, averaged over 100 times) is more than 95%. On the other hand, the full-data gbm (with p “ 6033 genes) is only 75% accurate. Huge simplification of the model-architecture with significant gain in the predictive performance! Step6. Gene Hunting: Beyond Marginal Screening. Wecomputetwo-samplet-teststatistic for all p “ 6033 genes and rank them according to their absolute values (the gene with the largestabsolutet-statisticgetsranked1–themostdifferentiallyexpressedgene). Thet-scores for the coregenes along with their p-values and ranks are: ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ t “ 0.15; p-value “ 0.88; rank “ 5383. 1627 ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ t “ 1.40; p-value “ 0.17; rank “ 1228. 2327 Thus, it is hopeless to find coregenes by any marginal-screening method–they are too weak marginally (in isolation), but jointly an extremely strong predictor. The good news is that ourapproachcanfindthosemultivariatehiddengemsinacompletelynonparametricfashion. Step 7. Lasso Analysis and Results. We have used the glmnet R-package. Lasso with λ min (minimum cross-validation error) selects 70 genes, where as λ (the largest lambda such 1se that error is within 1 standard error of the minimum) selects 60 genes. Main findings are: 18 Figure 7: SRBCT data analysis. Top-left: GBM-feature importance plot; top 50 genes are shown. Top-right: The associated infogram. Bottom panel: The estimated coretree with just three decision nodes. 19 (i)Thecoregenest1627,2327uwereneverselected,probablybecausetheyaremarginally very weak; and the significant interaction is not detectable by standard-lasso. (ii) Accuracy of Lasso with λ is around 78% (each time we have randomly selected min 85% data for training; computed the λ for making prediction; averaged over 100 runs). cv Step 8. Explainability. The final “two-gene model” is so simple and elegant that it can be easily communicated to doctors and medical practitioners: a patient with overexpressed gene 1627 and gene 2327 has a higher risk of getting prostate cancer. Biologists can use these two genes as robust prognostic markers for decision-making (or for recommending the proper drug). It is hard to imagine there could be a more accurate algorithm, one that is at least as compact as the “two-gene model.” We should not forget that the success behind this dramatic model-reduction hinges on discovering multivariate coregenes, which: (i) help us to gain insights into biological mechanisms [clarifying ‘who’ and ‘how’], and (ii) provide a simple explanation of the predictions [justifying ‘why’]. Example 6. SRBCT Gene Expression Data. It is a microarray experiment of Small Round Blue Cell Tumors (SRBCT) taken from a childhood cancer study. It contain information on p “ 2,308geneson63trainingsamplesand25testsamples. Amongn “ 63tumorexamples, 8 are Burkitt Lymphoma (BL), 23 are Ewing Sarcoma (EWS), 12 are neuroblastoma (NB), and 20 are rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). The dataset is available in the plsgenomics Rpackage. The top-panel of Fig. 7 shows the infogram, which identifies five core genes t123,742,1954,246,2050u. The