score for top seven features; rest are almost zero thus not shown. Bottom-right: infogram identifies the core variables tX ,X u from the X . The L-shaped 1 2 50 area with 0.1 width is highlighted in red; it contains inadmissible variables with either low relevance or high redundancy. 14 For easy interpretation, we standardize C by Cj and convert it between 0 and 1. Infoj maxjCj gram, which is a abbreviation of information diagram, is a scatter plot of tpR ,C qu p over j j j“1 the unit square r0,1s2; see the bottom-right corner of Fig. 4. L-Features. The highlighted L-shaped area contains features that are either irrelevant or redundant. For example, notice the position of X in the plot, indicating that it is highly 50 predictive but contains no new complementary information for the response. Clearly, there could be an opposite scenario: a variable carries valuable net individual information for Y, despite being moderately relevant (not ranked among the top few); see Sec. 3.1.4. Remark 6 (Predictive Features vs. CoreSet). Recall that in Example 3, the irrelevant feature X is strongly correlated with the relevant ones X and X through (3.2), thus 50 1 2 violate the so-called “irrepresentable condition”–for more details see the bibliographic notes section of Hastie et al. (2015, p. 311). In this scenario (which may easily arise in practice), it is hard to recover the “important” variables using traditional variable selection methods. The bottom line is: identifying CoreSet is a much more difficult undertaking than merely selecting the most predictive ones. The goal of infogram is to facilitate this process of discovering the key variables that are driving the outcome. Remark 7 (CoreML). Two additional comments before diving into a real data examples. First, machine learning models based on “core” features (CoreML) show improved stability, especially when there exists considerable correlation among the features.6 This will be demonstrated in the next two sections. Second, our approach is not tied to any particular machine learning method; it is completely model-agnostic and can be integrated with any arbitrary algorithm: choose a specific classifier ML and compute (3.3) and (3.4) to generate 0 the associated infogram. Example 4. MONK’s problems (Thrun et al., 1991). It is a collection of three binary artificial classification problems (MONK-1, MONK-2 and MONK-3) with p “ 6 attributes; available in the UCI Machine Learning Repository. As shown in Fig. 5, infogram selects tX ,X ,X u for the MONK-1 data, and tX ,X u for the MONK-3 data as the core features. 1 2 5 2 5 MONK-2 is an idiosyncratic case, where all six features turned out to be core! This indicates the possible complex nature of the classification rule for the MONK-2 problem. 3.1.3 COREtree: High-dimensional Microarray Data Analysis Howdoesonedistillacompact(parsimonious)MLmodelbybalancingaccuracy, robustness, and interpretability to the best extent? To answer that, we introduce COREtree, whose 6Numerous studies have found that many current methods like partial dependence plots, LIME, and SHAP could be highly misleading, particularly when there is strong dependence among features. 15 Figure 5: Infograms of Monk’s problems. CoreSets are denoted in blue. construction is guided by infogram. The methodology is illustrated using two real datasets, namely Prostate cancer and SRBCT tumor data. The main findings are striking: it shows how one can systematically search and construct robust and interpretable shallow decision tree models (often with just two or three genes) for noisy high-dimensional microarray datasets that are as powerful as the most elaborate and complex machine learning methods. Example 5. Prostate cancer gene expression data. The data consist of p “ 6033 gene expression measurements on 50 control and 52 prostate cancer patients. It is available at https://web.stanford.edu/„hastie/CASI files/DATA/prostate.html. Our analysis is summarized below. Step 1. Identifying CoreGenes. GBM-selected top 50 genes are shown in Fig. 6. We generate the infogram7 of these 50 variables (displayed on the top-right corner), which identifies five core-genes t1627,2327,77,1511,1322u. Step 2. Rank-transform: Robustness and Interpretability. Instead of directly operating on the gene expression values, we transform them into their ranks. Let tx ,...,x u be the j1 jn r measurements on jth gene with empirical cdf F . Convert the raw x to u by j ji ji r u “ F px q, i “ 1,...,n (3.5) ji j ji and work on the resulting U matrix instead of the original X . We do this transformanˆp nˆp tion for two reasons: first, to robustify, since it is known that gene expressions are inherently noisy. Second, to make it unit-free, since the raw gene expression values depend on the type 7To reduce unnecessary clutter, we have displayed the infogram using top 50 features, since the rest of the genes will be cramped inside the nonessential L-zone anyway. 16 Figure 6: Prostate data analysis. Top panel: the gbm-feature importance graph, along with