predicted A R labels based on these two models, respectively. Our goal is to compare and rank different models based on their risk of discrimination using ALFA-statistic: αp “ M x IpY p ,S | X q “ 0.00042, with pvalue 0.95 (3.9) A A A αp “ M x IpY p ,S | X q “ 0.195, with pvalue almost 0. (3.10) R R A α-inadmissibility statistic measures how much the final decision (prediction) was impacted by the protective features. A smaller value is better in the sense that it indicates improved fairness of the algorithm’s decision. Eqs (3.9)-(3.10) immediately imply that Model is A better (less discriminatory without being inefficient) than Model , and can be safely put R into production. Remark 15. Infogram and ALFA-testing can be used (by oversight board or regulators) as a fully-automated exploratory auditing tool that can systematically monitor and discover signs of bias or other potential gaps in compliance11; see Appendix A.3. Example 9. Taiwanese Credit Card data. This dataset was collected in October 2005, from a Taiwan-based bank (a cash and credit card issuer). It is available in the UCI Machine Learning Repository. We have records of n “ 30,000 cardholders, and for each we have 11Under the Algorithmic Accountability Act, large AI-driven corporations have to perform broader “admissibility” tests to keep a check on their algorithms’ fairness and trustworthiness; see Appx. A.2. 29 Figure 11: Left: Infogram of UCI credit card data. It selects two admissible features (i.e., those that are relevant and less-biased) that lie in the complementary of the “L”-shaped region. Right: The FINEtree (test data accuracy 82%). a response variable Y denoting: default payment status (Yes = 1, No = 0), along with p “ 23 predictor variables, including demographic factors, credit data, history of payment, etc. Among these 23 features we have two protected attributes: gender and age. The infogram, shown in the left panel of Fig. 11, clearly selects the variable Pay 0 and Pay 2 as the key admissible factors that determine the likelihood of default. Once we know the admissible features, the next question is: ‘how’ Pay 0 and Pay 2 are impacting the credit risk? Can we extract an admissible decision rule? For that we construct the FINEtree: a decision tree model based on the infogram-selected admissible features; see Fig. 11. The resulting predictive model is extremely transparent (with shallow yet accurate decision trees12) and also mitigates unwanted bias by avoiding inadmissible variables. Lenders, regulators, and bank managers can use this model for automating credit decisions. 12One can slightly improve accuracy by combining hundreds or thousands of trees (based on only the admissiblefeatures)usingrandomforestorboosting. Buttheopacityofsuchmodelsrendersthemunfitfor deployment in financial and bank sectors (Fahner, 2018). 30 Figure 12: ProPublica’s COMPAS Data: Top row: infogram and the estimated FINEtree. Bottom row: The two-sample distribution of the continuous variable end and binary event show their usefulness for predicting whether a defendant will recidivate or not. 31 3.2.4 Admissible Criminal Justice Risk Assessment Example 10. ProPublica’s COMPAS Data. COMPAS–an acronym for Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions–is a most widely used commercial algorithm within the criminal justice system for predicting recidivism risk (the likelihood of re-offending). The data13—complied by a team of journalists from ProPublica—constitute allcriminaldefendantswhoweresubjecttoCOMPASscreeninginBrowardCounty, Florida, during 2013 and 2014. For each defendant, p “ 14 features were gathered, including demographic information, criminal history, and other administrative information. Besides, the dataset also contains information on whether the defendant did in fact actually recidivate (or not) within two years of the COMPAS administration date (i.e., through the end of March 2016); and 3 additional sensitive attributes (gender, race, and age) for each case. The goal is to develop a accurate and fairer algorithm to predict whether a defendant will engage in violent crime or fail to appear in court if released. Fig. 12 shows our results. Infogram selects event and end as the vital admissible features. The bottom row of Fig. 12 confirms their predictive power. Unfortunately, these two variables are not explicitly defined by ProPublica in the data repository. Based on Brennan et al. (2009), we feel that event indicates some kind of crime that resulted in a prison sentence during a past observation period (we suspect the assessments were conducted by local probation officers duringsomeperiodbetweenJanuary2001andDecember2004),andthevariableenddenotes the number of days under observation (first event or end of study, whichever occurred first). TheassociatedFINEtreerecidivismalgorithmbasedoneventandendreaches93%accuracy with AUC 0.92 on a test set (consist of 20% of the data). Also see Appendix A.5. 3.2.5 FINEglm and Application to Marketing Campaign We are interested in the following question: how does one systematically build fairnessenhancing parametric statistical algorithms, such as a generalized linear model (GLM)? Example 11. Thera Bank Financial Marketing Campaign. ThisisacasestudyaboutThera Bank, themajorityofwhosecustomersareliabilitycustomers(depositors)withvaryingsizes of deposits—and among them, very few are borrowers (asset customers). The bank wants to expand its client