suspect the assessments were conducted by local probation officers duringsomeperiodbetweenJanuary2001andDecember2004),andthevariableenddenotes the number of days under observation (first event or end of study, whichever occurred first). TheassociatedFINEtreerecidivismalgorithmbasedoneventandendreaches93%accuracy with AUC 0.92 on a test set (consist of 20% of the data). Also see Appendix A.5. 3.2.5 FINEglm and Application to Marketing Campaign We are interested in the following question: how does one systematically build fairnessenhancing parametric statistical algorithms, such as a generalized linear model (GLM)? Example 11. Thera Bank Financial Marketing Campaign. ThisisacasestudyaboutThera Bank, themajorityofwhosecustomersareliabilitycustomers(depositors)withvaryingsizes of deposits—and among them, very few are borrowers (asset customers). The bank wants to expand its client network to bring more loan business and in the process, earn more through the interest on loans. To test the viability of this business idea they ran a small marketing campaign with n “ 5000 customers where a 480 (= 9.6%) accepted the personal loan offer. Motivated by the healthy conversion rate, the marketing department wants to devise a much more targeted digital campaign to boost loan applications with a minimal budget. 13Data: https://github.com/propublica/compas-analysis/raw/master/compas-scores-two-years.csv 32 Figure 13: Thera Bank marketing campaign data. Left: infogram. Right: scatter plot based on the two admissible features; the color blue and red indicate two different classes. Data and the problem. For each of 5000 customers, we have binary response Y: customer response to the last personal loan campaign, and 12 other features like customer’s annual income, family size, education level, value of house mortgage if any, etc. Among these 12 variables, there are two protected features: age and zip code. We consider zip code as a sensitive attribute, since it often acts as a proxy for race. Based on this data, we want to devise an automatic and fair digital marketing campaign that will maximize the targeting effectiveness of the advertising campaign while minimizing the discriminatory impact on protected classes to avoid legal landmines. Customer targeting using admissible machine learning. Our approach is summarized below: Step 1. Graphical tool for algorithmic risk management. Fig. 13 shows the infogram, which identifies two admissible features for loan decision: Income (annual income in $000), and CCAvg (Avg. spending on credit cards per month). However, the two highly predictive variables education (education level: undergraduate, graduate, or advanced) and family (family size of the customer) turn out to be inadmissible, even though they look completely “reasonable” on the surface. Consequently, including these variables in a model can do more harm than good by discriminating against minority applicants. Remark 16. It is evident that infogram can be used as an algorithmic risk management tool to quickly identify and combat unwanted hidden bias. Financial regulators can use infogram to quickly spot and remediate issues of historic discrimination; see Appendix A.3. 33 Remark 17. Infogram runs a ‘combing operation’ to distill down a large, complex problem to its core that holds the bulk of the “admissible information.” In our problem, the useful information is mostly concentrated into two variables—Income and CCAvg, as seen in the scatter diagram. Step 2. FINE-Logistic model: We train a logistic regression model based on the two admissible features, leading to the following model: logittµpxqu “ ´6.13 ` .04Income ` .06CCAvg, (3.11) where µpxq “ PrpY “ 1|X “ xq. This simple model achieves 91% accuracy. It provides a clear understanding of the ‘core’ factors that are driving the model’s recommendation. Remark 18 (Trustworthy algorithmic decision-making). FINEml models provide a transparent and self-explainable algorithmic decision-making system that comes with protection against unfair discrimination—which is essential for earning the trust and confidence of customers. The financial services industry can immensely benefit from this tool. Step 3. FINElasso. One natural question would be, How can we extend this idea to highdimensional glm models? In particular, we are interested in the following question: Is there any way we can directly embed ‘admissibility’ into the lasso regression model? The key idea is as follows: use adaptive regularization by choosing the weights to be the inverse of safety-indices, as computed in formula (3.6) of definition 4. Estimate FINElasso model by solving the following adaptive version: ÿn ” ` ˘ ı ÿp ˇ ˇ β p FINE “ argmin β ´y i pxT i βq`log 1`exT i β ´ λ w j ˇ β j ˇ , (3.12) i“1 j“1 where the weights are defined as ` ˘ w´1 “ MI Y,X | tS ,...,S u . (3.13) j j 1 q The adaptive penalization in (3.12) acts as a bias-mitigation mechanism by dropping (that is, heavily penalizing) the variables with very low safety-indices. This whole procedure can be easily implemented using the penalty.factor argument of glmnet R-package (Friedman et al., 2010). No doubt a similar strategy can be adopted for other regularized methods such asridgeorelastic-net. Foranexcellentreviewondifferentkindsofregularizationprocedures, see Hastie (2020). 34 Remark19. AfulllassoonXselectsthestrongsurrogates(variablesfamilyandeducation) as some of the top features due to their high predictive