They are jointly overexpressed in the tumor samples but interestingly theyhaveverylittlemarginalinformation(notindividuallydifferentiallyexpressed,asshown in Fig. 6). Accordingly, traditional linear-model-based analysis will fail to detect this genepair as a key biomarker. (ii) The simple decision tree model in Fig. 2 provides a mechanistic understanding and justification as to why the algorithm thinks a patient has prostate cancer or not. (iii) Finally, it provides the needed guidance on what to do next by having a control over the system. In particular, a cancer biologist can choose between different diagnosis and treatment plans with the goal to regulate those two oncogenes. Goals and Organization. The primary goal of this paper is to introduce some new fundamental concepts and tools to lay the foundation of admissible machine learning that are efficient (enjoy good predictive accuracy), fair (prevent discrimination against minority groups), and interpretable (provide mechanistic understanding) to the best possible extent. Our statistical learning framework is grounded in the foundational concepts of information theory. The required statistical formalism (nonparametric estimation and inference methods)andinformation-theoreticprinciples(entropy, conditionalentropy, relativeentropy, and conditional mutual information) are introduced in Section 2. A new nonparametric estimation technique for conditional mutual information (CMI) is proposed that scales to large 5 Figure 2: A two-gene admissible tree classifier for prostate cancer data with p “ 6033 gene expression measurements on 50 control and 52 cancer patients. datasets by leveraging the power of machine learning. For statistical inference, we have devised a new model-based bootstrap strategy. The method was applied to the problem of conditional independence testing and integrative genomics (breast cancer multi-omics data from Cancer Genome Atlas). Based on this theoretical foundation, in Section 3, we laid out the basic elements of admissible machine learning. Section 3.1 focuses on algorithmic interpretability: how can we efficiently search and design self-explanatory algorithmic models by balancing accuracy and robustness to the best possible extent? Can we do it in a completely model-agnostic manner? Key concepts and tools introduced in this section are: Core features, infogram, L-features, net-predictive information, and COREml. The procedure was applied to several real datasets, including high-dimensional microarray gene expression datasets (prostate cancer and SRBCT data), MONK’s problems, and Wisconsin breast cancer data. Section 3.2 focuses on algorithmic fairness, which tackles the challenging problem of designing admissible ML algorithms that are simultaneously efficient, interpretable, and equitable. There are several key techniques introduced in this section: admissible feature selection, ALFA-testing, graphical risk assessment tool, and FINEml. We illustrate the proposed methods using examples from criminal justice system (ProPublica’s COMPAS recidivism data), financial service industry (Adult income data, Taiwan credit card data), and marketing ad campaign. We conclude the paper in Section 4 by reviewing the challenges and opportunities of next-generation admissible ML technologies. 6 2 Information-Theoretic Principles and Methods The foundation of admissible machine learning relies on information-theoretic principles and nonparametric methods. The key theoretical ideas and results are presented in this section to develop a deeper understanding of the conceptual basis of our new framework. 2.1 Notation Let Y be the response variable taking values t1,...,ku, X “ pX ,...,X q denotes a p1 p dimensional feature matrix, and S “ pS ,...,S q is additional set of q covariates (e.g., 1 q collection of sensitive attributes like race, gender, age, etc.). A variable is called mixed when it can take either discrete, continuous, or even categorical values, i.e., completely unrestricted data-types. Throughout, we will allow both X and S to be mixed. We write Y KK X to denote the independence of Y and X. While, the conditional independence of Y and X given S is denoted by Y KK X | S. For a continuous random variable, f and F denote the probability density and distribution function, respectively. For a discrete random variable the probability mass function will be denoted by p with proper subscript. 2.2 Conditional Mutual Information Our theory starts with an information-theoretic view of conditional dependence. Under conditional independence: Y KK X | S the following decomposition holds for all y,x,s f py,x|sq “ f py|sqf px|sq. Y,X|S Y|S X|S More than testing independence, often the real interest lies in quantifying the conditional dependence: the average deviation of the ratio f py,x|sq Y,X|S , (2.1) f py|sqf px|sq Y|S X|S which can be measured by conditional mutual information (Wyner, 1978). Definition 1. Conditional mutual information (CMI) between Y and X given S is defined as: ¡ ˆ ˙ f py,x|sq MIpY,X | Sq “ log Y,X|S f py,x,sq dy dx ds. (2.2) Y,X,S f py|sqf px|sq Y|S X|S y,x,s 7 Two Important Properties. (P1) One of the striking features of CMI is that it captures multivariate non-linear conditional dependencies between the variables in a completely nonparametric manner. (P2) CMI possesses the necessary and sufficient condition as a measure of conditional independence, in the sense that MIpY,X|Sq “ 0 if and only