( X “ Capital gain, Capital loss, Occupation, Education . A They share very little information with S yet are highly predictive. In other words, they enjoy high relevance and high safety-index. Next, we also see that there is a feature that appears at the lower-right corner (cid:32) ( X “ Relationship R whichistheprimesourceofbias; thesubscript‘R’standsforrisky. Thevariablerelationship represents the respondent’s role in the family—i.e., whether the breadwinner is husband, wife, child, or other relative. Remark 12. SinceX ishighlypredictive, mostunguided “pureprediction”MLalgorithms R will include it in their models, even though it is quite unsafe. Admissible ML models should avoid using variables like relationship to reduce unwanted bias.9 A careful examination reveals that there could be some unintended association between relationship and other protected attributes due to social constructs. Without any formal method, it is a hopeless task (especially for practitioners and policymakers; see Lakkaraju and Bastani 2020, Sec. 5.2) to identify these innocent-looking proxy variables in a scalable and automated way. Step 3. ALFA-test and encoded bias. We can construct an honest fairness assessment metric by conditioning CMI with X (instead of Xq: A x MIpY,S | X q “ 0.13, with pvalue almost 0. (3.7) A This strongly suggests historical bias or discrimination is encoded in the data. Our approach not only quantifies but also allows ways to mitigate bias to create an admissible prediction rule; this will be discussed in Step 4. The preceding discussions necessitate the following, new general class of fairness metrics. Definition 5 (Admissible Fairness Criterion). To check whether an algorithmic decision is fair given the sensitive attributes and the set of admissible features (identified from infogram), define AdmissibLe FAirness criterion, in short the ALFA-test, as α :“ αpY | S,X q “ MIpY,S | X q. (3.8) Y A A Three Different Interpretations. TheALFA-statistic(3.8)canbeinterpretedfromthree different angles. 9or at least should be assessed by experts to determine their appropriateness. 27 Figure 10: Census Income Data. The left plot shows the infogram. And FINEtree is displayed on the right. ‚ It quantifies the trade-off between fairness and model performance: how much netpredictive value is contained within S (and its close associates)? This is the price we pay in terms of accuracy to ensure a higher degree of fairness. ‚ A small α-inadmissibility value ensures that individuals with similar ‘admissible characteristics’ receive a similar outcome. Note that our strategy of comparing individuals with respect to only (infogram-learned) “admissible” features allows us to avoid the (direct and indirect) influences of sensitive attributes on the decision making. ‚Lastly, theα-statisticcanalsobeinterpretedas“biasinresponseY.” Foragivenproblem, if we have access to several “comparable” outcome variables10 then we choose the one which minimizes the α-inadmissibility measure. In this way, we can minimize the loss of predictive accuracy while mitigating the bias as best as we can. Remark 13 (Generalizability). Note that, unlike traditional fairness measures, the proposed ALFA-statistic is valid for multi-class problems with a set of multivariate mixed protected attributes—which is, in itself, a significant step forward. Step 4. FINEtree. The inherent historical footprints of bias (as noted in eq. 3.7) need 10e.g, Obermeyer et al. (2019) showed that healthcare cost can be a poor proxy of health, especially for Black patients; similarly, Blattner and Nelson (2021) showed that credit scores could be a poor proxy for creditworthiness especially for low-income and minority groups. 28 to be deconstructed to build a less-discriminatory classification model for the income data. Fig. 10 shows FINEtree—a simple decision tree based on the four admissible features, which attains 83.5% accuracy. Remark 14. FINEtree is an inherently explainable, fair, and highly competent (decent accuracy) model whose design was guided by the principles of admissible machine learning. Step 5. Trust in algorithm through risk assessment and ALFA-ranking: The current standard for evaluating ML models is primarily based on predictive accuracy on a test set, which is narrow and inadequate. For an algorithm to be deployable it has to be admissible; an unguided ML carries the danger of inheriting bias from data. To see that, consider the following two models: Model : Decision tree based on X (FINEtree) A A Model : Decision tree based on X Ytrelationshipu. R A p p Both models have comparable accuracy around 83.5%. Let Y and Y be the predicted A R labels based on these two models, respectively. Our goal is to compare and rank different models based on their risk of discrimination using ALFA-statistic: αp “ M x IpY p ,S | X q “ 0.00042, with pvalue 0.95 (3.9) A A A αp “ M x IpY p ,S | X q “ 0.195, with pvalue almost 0. (3.10) R R A α-inadmissibility statistic measures how much the final decision (prediction) was impacted by the protective features. A smaller value is better in the sense that it indicates improved fairness of the algorithm’s decision. Eqs (3.9)-(3.10)