decomposed as CAIRpY,G|Dq “ PrpD “ IqAIRpY,G|D “ Iq ` PrpD “ IIqAIRpY,G|D “ IIq. (6.8) Applying (6.8) for our Berkeley example data yields the following estimate: { CAIRpY,G|Dq “ 0.43ˆ0.92`0.57ˆ0.94 “ 0.93 ą 0.80. This shows no evidence of sex bias in graduate admissions! The moral is: beware of spurious bias, andbeawareoftwotypesoferrorsthatmightoccurduetoanincorrectfairness-metric: falsely rejecting a fair algorithm as unfair (Type-I fairness error), and falsely accepting an unfair algorithm as fair (Type-II fairness error). A.5 Revisiting COMPAS Data There is another version of the COMPAS data19 (binarized features) that researchers have used for evaluating the accuracy of their algorithms. This dataset contains a list of handpicked p “ 22 features over n “ 10,747 criminal records. Goal is to build an interpretable and accurate recidivism prediction model. Infogram-selected COREtree is displayed below. 10-fold cross-validation shows p72 ˘ 1.50q% classification accuracy of our model, which is close to the best known performance on this version of the COMPAS data. A.6 Two Cultures of Machine Learning Black-boxMLculture: itbuildslargecomplexmodels, keepingsolelythepredictiveaccuracy in mind. White-box ML culture: it directly builds interpretable models, often by enforcing domain-knowledge-based constraints on traditional ML algorithms like decision tree or neural net. Orthodox ‘black-or-white thinkers’ of each camp have been at loggerheads for some time. This raises the question: is there any way to get the best of both worlds? If so, how? 19https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Jimmy-Lin/TreeBenchmark/master/datasets/compas/data.csv 42 Figure 14: Infogram-selected COREtree. An Integrated (third?) culture: In this paper, we have taken the middle path between two extremes. We leverage (instead of boycotting) the power (scalability and flexibility) of modern machine learning methods by viewing them as a heavy-duty “toolkit” that can efficiently drillthroughbigcomplexdatasetstosystematicallysearchforthehiddenadmissiblemodels. A.7 COREtree: Iris Data The dataset includes three kinds of iris flowers (setosa, versicolor, or virginica) with 50 samples from each class. The task is to develop a model (preferably a compact model based on only important features) to accurately classify iris flowers based on their sepals and petals’ length and width (p “ 4). Before we start our analysis, it is important to be aware of the highly-correlated nature of the 4-features; the estimated 4ˆ4 correlation matrix is displayed below: » fi 1.000 ´0.118 0.872 0.818 — ffi — ffi — ´0.118 1.000 ´0.428 ´0.366ffi ˆ — ffi Σ “ — ffi (6.9) ρ — ffi 0.872 ´0.428 1.000 0.963 – fl 0.818 ´0.366 0.963 1.000 The infogram for the iris data, constructed using the recipe given in section 3.1, is shown at the top-left corner of Fig. 15, which clearly identifies petal.length and petal.width as 43 the core relevant features. Since we have reduced the problem to a bivariate one (variables: petal.length and petal.width), we can now simply plot the data. This is done in the top-right of Fig. 15. We can even visually draw the linear decision surfaces to separate the three classes; see the red and blue lines in the scatter plot. Finally, we train a decision tree classifier based on the selected core features: petal.length and petal.width. The estimated COREtree is shown in the bottom panel, which gives a beautifully crisp (readily interpretable) decision rule for classifying iris flowers. A.8 EU’s Artificial Intelligence Act On 21st April 2021, the European Union (EU) unveiled strict regulations20 to govern highrisk AI systems, which provides one of the first formal and comprehensive regulatory frameworks on AI. Few key takeaways from the report: ‚ A risk management system shall be established, implemented, documented and maintained in relation to high-risk AI systems. ‚ In identifying the most appropriate risk management measures, the following shall be ensured: elimination or reduction of risks as far as possible through adequate design and development. ‚ Bias monitoring, detection, and correction mechanism should be at place for high-risk AI systems in the pre-as well as the post-deployment stages. ‚ High-risk AI systems shall be designed and developed in such a way to ensure that their operation is sufficiently transparent to enable users to interpret the system’s output and use it appropriately. ‚ High-risk AI systems should equip with appropriate human-machine interface tools— which allows the system to be effectively overseen by natural persons during the period in which the AI system is in use. ‚ High-risk AI technology providers shall ensure that their systems undergo regulatory compliant assessments. If the AI system is not in conformity with the requirements, they need to take the necessary corrective actions before putting them into service. Companies that fail to do so could face fines of up to 6% of their global sales. 20The full report is available online at https://bit.ly/EUAI act. Also see the New York Times article https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/16/business/artificial-intelligence-regulation.html 44 Figure 15: Iris data analysis. Top left: infogram; top right: the scatter plot of the data based on the selected core features; three different classes are indicated by red, green, and blue colors; bottom: the estimated decision