score (3.3) for X . The goal of this graphical tool is to j j assist identification of admissible features which have little or no information-overlap with sensitive attributes S, yet are reasonably predictive for Y. Interpretation. Fig. 9 displays an infogram with six covariates. The L-shaped highlighted region contains variables that are either inadmissible (the horizontal slice of L) or inadequate (the vertical slice of L) for prediction. ThecomplementarysetLc comprisesofthedesiredadmissiblefeatures. Focuson variables A and B: both have the same predictive power, but are gained through a completely different manner. The variable B gathered information for Y entirely through the protected features (verify it from the graphical representation of B), and is thus inadmissible. On the other hand, the variable A carries direct informational value, having no connection with the prohibitive S, and is thus totally admissible. Unfortunately, though, reality is usually more complex than this clear-cut black and white A-B situation. The fact of the matter is: admissibility (or fairness, per se) is not a yes/no concept, but a matter of degree8, which is explained at the bottom two rows of Fig. 9 utilizing variables C to F. Remark 10. The graphical exploratory nature of the infogram makes the whole learning process much more transparent, interactive, and human-centered. Legal doctrine. Note that in our framework the protected variables are used only in the pre-deployment phase to determine what other (admissible) attributes to include in the 8“Zero bias” is an illusion. All models are biased (to a different degree), but some are admissible. The real question is how to methodically construct those admissible ones from possibly biased data. 25 algorithm to mitigate unforeseen downstream bias, which is completely legal (Hellman, 2020). It is also advisable that once inadmissible variables are identified using an infogram, not to throw them (especially the highly predictive ones such as the feature B in Fig. 9) blindly from the analysis without consulting domain experts—including some of them may not necessarily imply violation of the law; ultimately, it is up to the policymakers and judiciarytodeterminetheirappropriateness(legalpermissibility)basedonthegivencontext. Our job as statisticians is to discover those hidden inadmissible L-features (preferably in a fully data-driven and automated manner) and raise a red flag for further investigation. 3.2.3 FINEtree and ALFA-Test: Financial Industry Applications Example 8. The Census Income Data. The dataset is extracted from 1994 United States Census Bureau database, available in UCI Machine Learning Repository. It is also known as the “Adult Income” dataset, which contains n “ 45,222 records involving personal details such as yearly income (whether it exceeds $50,000 or not), education level, age, gender, marital-status, occupation, etc. The classification task is to determine whether a person makes $50k per year based on a set of 14 attributes, of which four are protective: (cid:32) ( S “ Age, Gender, Race, Marital Status . Step 1. Trust in data. Is there any evidence of built-in bias in the data? That is to say, whether a ‘significant’ portion of the decision-making (Y is greater or less than 50k per year) was influenced by the sensitive attributes S beyond what is already captured by other covariates X? One may be tempted to use MIpY,S | Xq as a measure for assessing fairness. But we need to be careful while interpreting the value of MIpY,S | Xq. It can take a ‘small’ value for two reasons: First, a genuine case of fair decision-making where individuals with similar x received a similar outcome irrespective of their age, gender, and other protected characteristics; see Appendix A.4 for one such example. Second, there is a collusion between X and S in the sense that X contains some proxies of S which reduce its effect-size—leading one to falsely declare a decision-rule fair when it is not. Remark 11 (Shielding Effect). The presence of a highly-correlated surrogate variable in the conditional set drastically reduces the size of the CMI-statistics. We call this contraction phenomenon of effect-size in the presence of proxy feature the “shielding effect.” To guard against this effect-distortion phenomenon we first have to identify the admissible features from the infogram. Step 2. Infogram to identify inadmissible proxy features. The infogram, shown in the left 26 panel of Fig. 10, finds four admissible features (cid:32) ( X “ Capital gain, Capital loss, Occupation, Education . A They share very little information with S yet are highly predictive. In other words, they enjoy high relevance and high safety-index. Next, we also see that there is a feature that appears at the lower-right corner (cid:32) ( X “ Relationship R whichistheprimesourceofbias; thesubscript‘R’standsforrisky. Thevariablerelationship represents the respondent’s role in the family—i.e., whether the breadwinner is husband, wife, child, or other relative. Remark 12. SinceX ishighlypredictive, mostunguided “pureprediction”MLalgorithms R will include it in their models, even though it is quite unsafe. Admissible ML models should avoid using variables like