algorithm. 3.2 FINEml: Algorithmic Fairness ML-systems are increasingly used for automated decision-making in various high-stakes domains such as credit scoring, employment screening, insurance eligibility, medical diagnosis, criminal justice sentencing, and other regulated areas. To ensure that we are making responsible decisions using such algorithms, we have to deploy admissible models that can balance Fairness, INterpretability, and Efficiency (FINE) to the best possible extent. This section discusses principles and tools for designing such FINE-algorithms. 3.2.1 FINE-ML: Approaches and Limitations Imagine that a machine learning algorithm is used by a bank to accurately predict whether to approve or deny a loan application based on the probability of default. This ML-based 22 risk-assessing tool has access to the following historical data: (cid:114) Y: {0,1} Loan status variable–1 whether the loan was approved and 0 if denied. (cid:114) X: Feature matrix {income, loan amount, education, credit history, zip code} (cid:114) S: Collection of protected attributes {gender, marital status, age, race}. To automate the loan-eligibility decision-making process, the bank wants to develop an accurate classifier that will not discriminate among applicants on the basis of their protected features. Naturally, the question is: how to go about designing such ML-systems that are accurate and at the same time provide safeguards against algorithmic discrimination? Approach 1 Non-constructive: We can construct a myriad of ML models by changing and tuningdifferenthyper-parameters, baselearners, etc. Onecankeepbuildingdifferentmodels until one finds a perfect one that avoids adverse legal and regulatory issues. There are at least two problems with this ‘try until you get it right’ approach: first, it is non-constructive. The whole process gives zero guidance on how to rectify the algorithm to make it less-biased. Second, there is no single definition of fairness—more than twenty different definitions have been proposed over the last few years (Narayanan, 2018). And the troubling part is that these different fairness measures are mutually incompatible to each other and cannot be satisfied simultaneously (Kleinberg, 2018); see Appendix A.4. Hence this laborious process could end up being a wild-goose chase, resulting in a huge waste of computation. Approach 2Constructive: HereweseektoconstructMLmodelsthat—bydesign—mitigate bias and discrimination. To execute this task successfully, we must first identify and remove proxyvariables(e.g., zipcode)fromthelearningset, whichpreventaclassificationalgorithm from achieving desired fairness. But how to define a proper mathematical criterion to detect those surrogate variables? Can we develop some easily interpretable graphical exploratory tools to systematically uncover those problematic variables? If we succeed in doing this, then ML developers can use it as a data filtration tool to quickly spot and remove the potential sources of biases in the pre-modeling (data-curation) stage, in order to mitigate fairness issues in the downstream analysis. 23 A B C Y Y S X Y X S X S D E F Y Y Y X S X S X S Figure9: Infogrammapsvariablesinatwodimensional(effectivenessvs. safety)diagram. It is a pre-modeling nonparametric exploratory tool for admissible feature selection. Infogram is interpreted based on graphical (conditional) independence structure. In real problems, all variables will have some degree of correlation with the protected attributes. Important part is to quantify the “degree,” which is measured through eq. (3.6)—as indicated by varying thicknesses of the edges (bold to dotted). Ultimately, the purpose of this graphical diagnostic tool is to provide the necessary guardrails to construct an appropriate learning algorithm that can retain as much of the predictive accuracy as possible, while defending against unforeseen biases—tool for risk-benefit analysis. 24 3.2.2 InfoGram and Admissible Feature Selection We offer a diagnostic tool for identification of admissible features that are predictive and safe. Before going any further, it is instructive to formally define what we mean by ‘safe.’ Definition 4 (Safety-index and Inadmissibility). Define the safety-index for variable X as j ` ˘ F “ MI Y,X | tS ,...,S u (3.6) j j 1 q ThisquantifieshowmuchextrainformationX carriesforY thatisnotacquiredthroughthe j sensitive variables S “ pS ,...,S q. For interpretation purposes, we standardize F between 1 q j zero and one by dividing by the max F . Variables with “small” F-values (F-stands for j j fairness) will be called inadmissible, as they possess little or no informational value beyond their use as a dummy for protected characteristics. Construction. Inthecontextoffairness, weconstructtheinfogrambyplottingtpR ,F qu p , j j j“1 where recall R denotes the relevance score (3.3) for X . The goal of this graphical tool is to j j assist identification of admissible features which have little or no information-overlap with sensitive attributes S, yet are reasonably predictive for Y. Interpretation. Fig. 9 displays an infogram with six covariates. The L-shaped highlighted region contains variables that are either inadmissible (the horizontal slice of L) or inadequate (the vertical slice of L) for prediction. ThecomplementarysetLc comprisesofthedesiredadmissiblefeatures. Focuson variables A and B: both have the same predictive power, but are gained through a completely different manner. The variable B gathered information for Y entirely through the