and d refers to destination): Distance, Population_d, GDP_d, GDP_o, Population_o, Colony_o, Colony_d, Landlocked_o, GATT membership_d, Landlocked_d, Member of EU_o, Hostility level_d, WTO membership_d, Hostility level_o, Member of EU_d, Sanction threat trade, Island_d, Sanction imposition trade, Island_o, Customs union agreement, Common language, FTA agreement, WTO membership_o, Preferential trading area goods, GATT membership_o, Environmental impact assessment, Preferential trading area services, Continguity, Polity_d, Language_d, Tariffs, Polity_o, Latitude_o, Latitude_d, Language_o, and Year (all used in Figure 8). By using AI methods, issues such as endogeneity are marginalized. Most traditional methods for high-dimensional statistics are based on the assumption that none of the regressors are correlated with the regression error (i.e. they are exogenous). Yet, endogeneity can arise incidentally from a large pool of regressors in cases of a high-dimensional regression. This leads to the inconsistency of the penalized least-squares method, and to possible false outcomes and sub-optimal policies. Our methods are not affected by this notion. However, in the next section, we present methods for validation of trade data (including anomaly detection), as well as other potential methods such as RL and causal learning that we aim to explore as part of future work. 5.2 Validation and Anomaly Detection In the system developed, a validation and outlier detection module is deployed. The Validation engine presented in this section is based on work from Batarseh et al. (2017). The engine consists of two parts: flag validation, and anomaly (i.e. outlier) detection. We worked with USDA analysts to define the “acceptable” ranges for numbers within a sector, for example, if production Page 28 of 73 of milk exceeds a certain amount, then our system should raise a “flag”. For instance, for yearly values, a red flag means that the number is not within the accepted historical range, and it requires attention. Red flags are expected to be prominent during black swan events for example. An orange flag means the number is within the range but not the last 10 years, yellow means the value is within the last 10 years’ range, but not 5 years range, then blue indicates 5 years range, and green indicates 3 years. The flag system is applied to livestock, in use case #2. Another measure to identify outliers is using statistical methods: Median and Median Absolute Deviation Method (MAD). For this outlier detection method, the median of the residuals is calculated. Then, the difference is calculated between each historical value and this median. These differences are expressed as their absolute values, and a new median is calculated and multiplied by an empirically derived constant to yield the median absolute deviation (MAD). If a value is a certain number of MAD away from the median of the residuals, that value is classified as an outlier. The default threshold is 3 MAD. This method is generally more effective than the mean and standard deviation method for detecting outliers, but it can be too aggressive in classifying values that are not really extremely different. Also, if more than 50% of the data points have the same value, MAD is computed to be 0, so any value different from the residual median is classified as an outlier. MAD is calculated for univariate and multivariate outliers, using these two formulas; given a two dimensional paired set of data (X , Y ), (X , Y ) … (X , 1 1 2 2 n Y ): n 𝑀𝐴𝐷 = 𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑛 (|𝑋𝑖 −𝑋̃|) (6a) 2 2 1/2 𝐺𝑒𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐 (𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑒) 𝑀𝐴𝐷 = (𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑛 (|𝑋𝑖−𝑋̃|) + 𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑛 (|𝑌𝑖 −𝑌̃|) ) (6b) Page 29 of 73 Use case #2 (the box below) is an example analysis of USDA’s Economic Research Service (ERS) livestock data using validation and outliers (all code and data are available in a public Github repository – refer to the data availability section): Usecase#2: U.S. livestock trade are collected from the National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) and the United States Department of Commerce (Foreign Trade Division). The flag and the anomaly detection modules were executed. Table 5 illustrates example results from the flag system. Table 6 presents example outlier values per commodity for the same dataset. All results are presented in Appendix 3. Such results are presented to a federal analyst for decision making and policy analysis. Table 5: Flag Colors for Example USDA Data Series Data series Unit Value Color Pork, No Util Practice, No Prod Practice, No Physical Million LBS, 7148 Red Attribute, Exports carcass-weight equivalent Pork, No Util Practice, No Prod Practice, No Physical Million LBS, 14.2 Green Attribute, Farm production carcass-weight equivalent Pork, No Util Practice, No Prod Practice, No Physical Million LBS, 965 Green Attribute, Imports carcass-weight equivalent Pork, No Util Practice, No Prod Practice, No Physical (LBS) Pounds 64.103 Yellow Attribute, Per capita disappearance, Carcass weight 8 Pork, No Util Practice, No Prod Practice, No Physical (LBS) Pounds 49.744 Yellow Attribute,