2 9 Figure 5 shows the R-Shinny app that is developed to present the 6-clusters model (as well as the associations and correlations), and how countries relate to each other in it. The 6-clusters model illustrates the countries in cluster 1 are the biggest players (USA, Japan, China, EU…etc). That result is then used to predict the future of trade for year 2020 and beyond. For example, results for trade predictions through the XGBoost Model scored predictions’ quality = 69%, and through LightGBM scored a quality of 88% (in contrast, GBoost scored the Page 21 of 73 lowest of the three approaches). Data from cluster 1 countries are used to train the models, but scoring is applied to all countries. Parameter tuning for boosting models include: Number of leaves, Maximum Depth of the tree, Learning Rate, and Feature fraction. Figure 4: Silhouette and Elbow Diagrams Figure 5: R-Shiny app for EML Small learning rates are optimal (0.01), with large tree depths. Additionally, to speed up training and avoid over-fitting, feature fraction is set to 0.6; that is, selecting 60% of the features before Page 22 of 73 training each tree. Early stopping round is set to 500; that allowed the model to train until the validation score stops improving. Maximum tree depth is set to 8. Those settings led to the best output through LightGBM. Sugar for instance had an R2 score (prediction quality) of 0.73, 0.88 for Beef, and 0.66 for Corn (three essential commodities). These initial results confirm the applicability of EML methods to projecting trade patterns and also point to accuracy gains over traditional approaches. However, after using only countries from cluster 1: the models yielded even better results. Figure 6 illustrates the boosting models quality (actual vs. predicted) before deployment of k-means outputs (i.e. using cluster 1), and after (i.e. with and without EML). Figure 6: (a) Models quality without EML vs. (b) Models quality with EML Moreover, EML methods presented in this manuscript allowed for the extractions of the best economic variables that would affect trade of specific commodities. Distance had the highest effect (i.e. the U.S.is better off trading beef to Canada and Mexico, its two closest neighbors). While Australia, being an island, has to focus its policies for beef exports on GDP measures, and the population of the importer. Feature Importance for all economic variables are (namely: split, Page 23 of 73 gain.): Distance: 1469, 6.38. GDP of Exporter: 1431, 6.22. Year: 993, 4.318. Population of Exporter: 882, 3.83. Population of Importer: 847, 3.68. Currency of Importer: 801, 3.48. The next section (5) introduces a use case for contrasting two commodities (milk and corn) by economic variables, and what that means for decision making. Over 2006-2017, the USDA forecast accuracy (Ag outlook reports) was less than 35% (USDA ERS, 2018). Their accuracy improves to 92% only after having actual data for three-quarters of the forecasted year. Models presented in this paper offer forecast accuracy in the 69% – 88% range (even before data for three quarters are available). Albeit models presented offer higher accuracy, but what happens when those data patterns are majorly disrupted by an outlier event such as trade wars, embargoes, or pandemics? How are economic variables such as tariffs, production, and prices influencing policy during black swan events? The next section presents methods to evaluate such shifts in trade patterns and use AI methods to provide pointers to policy alternatives. 5. Outlier Events and AI Methods During the Covid-19 pandemic, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) updated their forecasts for the global economy. The IMF warned of soaring debt levels, as well as country’s economies contracting (8% contraction for the US, 9.1% for Brazil, as well as 10.5% for Mexico). Moreover, the IMF estimates an overall contraction of 4.9% in global GDP in 2020 (IMF, 2020). Figure 7 illustrates IMF’s Global GDP projections; the figure illustrates how Covid-19 lead to a major drop in 2020’s country-wise GDP. Such numbers provide a general overview of the global economy’s health; however, it is not clear how GDP rates will affect trade patterns around the world, as well as production, prices, and many other economic variables. Page 24 of 73 Isolation forests, distance-based, and density-based approaches can be generally used for outlier detection within a learning environment, however, for explainability and clarity purposes, in our presented boosting models, we present commodity-specific variable correlations to support policy making during outlier events. For example, some commodities infer that the GDP of the importer is the main influencer (via classification measures) of the size of trade between both countries. Other commodities exchange depends on distance or population and so on. Hence, by looking at commodity-specific changes (within different contexts), implications on policies that shape production, pricing, or consumption of that commodity could be altered in a more