these predictions are also limited in their ability to quantify the contribution of underlying economic factors. For instance, Chapter 4 (World Economic Outlook – International Monetary Fund, 2019) notes that “the gravity model clearly distinguishes between the principal drivers of bilateral trade; these can be more difficult to disentangle in practice.” Mega-models (using applied general equilibrium techniques) have been a boon to trade policy research over the past 25 years (Kehoe et al., 2017). They have helped change the landscape of trade negotiations by arming developing and emerging economies with tools generally used by their developed counterparts (GTAP, 2019). However, as Kehoe et al. (2017) note, these models need additional theoretical development and improved measures of data employed for simulation of policy outcomes. These mega-models relying mostly on annual data are not nimble enough to respond to short- to medium-term informational needs. More importantly, policy uncertainty or uncertainty in general further limits both back-of-the envelope and mega-modeling approaches to inform decision-making. In the latter case, part of the challenge is the static nature of most trade models, which often conduct comparative static analysis of trade outcomes from deterministic trade policy changes. For example: Steinberg Page 9 of 73 (2019) offers a theoretical model incorporating trade policy uncertainty. Using applied general equilibrium techniques, he finds that Brexit had a negative, but small effect on U.K.’s GDP. Other studies exploring the empirical effects of trade policy uncertainty or trade war include Amiti et al. (2019), Caldara et al. (2019) and Fajgelbaum et al. (2019). Little guidance exists on theoretical modeling of trade policy uncertainty and its implications for producer and consumer behavior. As a result, ad hoc approaches to incorporating uncertainty can create specification bias in quantifying economic relationships and consequently, less precise outcomes on future agricultural trade patterns. The later, i.e. less precise forecasts, impacts producer and consumer decisions as well as government expenditures. These mega-models draw information from a variety of sources, e.g. elasticities, which can introduce additional specification errors or mismatch data distributions. While grappling with trade policy and other uncertainties, the availability of big data and advances in AI software systems posed new challenges to conventional approaches (such as gravity models) to quantifying complex economic relationships (Varian 2014). The challenges include dealing with the sheer volume of data (evolving from spreadsheets and SQL databases towards Hadoop clusters and distributed data), the lengthy list of variables available to explain such relationships (and associated collinearity issues), and the need to move beyond static and linear models. AI has been offered as an alternative to address many of these challenges (Bajari et al. 2015; Mullainathan and Spiess 2017; Batarseh and Yang 2017; Athey and Imbens 2019). Several authors including Chief Economists of Google and Amazon have strongly advocated the use of big data and AI to uncover increasingly complex relationships even in an analysis as simple as fitting a supply or demand function. The economics community is catching on, but the speed of AI advances, i.e. new techniques emerge every month, can make an academic study Page 10 of 73 stale by the time peer reviews are completed. Nonetheless, the academic community facing seismic shocks from advances in big data and AI has been called on to revisit time-tested theories and relationships (Mullainathan and Spiess 2017). In sum, traditional models – ad hoc, econometrics or mega-models – have been challenged both on modeling uncertainties, and providing accurate and on-time information for policy and decision making. 3. Methods Data for this project are from the World Trade Organization (WTO) Bilateral Imports dataset, which comprises annual country to country trade data from 1996 to 2018. Data come from countries reporting imports from trading partners around the world, only countries that are part of the WTO report imports (the sample of countries is ~190). International trade data are organized by Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System (HS Code System), and this study focused on the chapter level of the system: the 2-digit codes (HS-2). Data on the 96chapter level trade products are downloaded from the WTO developer portal (https://apiportal.wto.org/). Using Pandas and Numpy libraries in Python, data are loaded into a PostgreSQL database for ease of analysis. We dig deeper (lower aggregation) for the EML models: data for EML are extracted from the General Agricultural Trade System (GATS) on the HS-4 level for prime agricultural commodities (years 1960-2018); from this web portal: https://apps.fas.usda.gov/gats/default.aspx. Finally, International Monetary Fund (IMF) data are collected for GDP statistics (https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/), and U.S. Department of Commerce data have been collected for example trade outliers in Livestock, and overall data and models’ validation Page 11 of 73 (presented in section 5). All cleaned datasets are shared in a public repository on Github (refer to the data availability statement). 3.1 AR for Trade Mining frequent commodities that trade in association with each