outcome X to increase or decrease, what actions do I need to take? (Ho, 2017). Such methods allow for acute and more detailed simulation of trade outcomes in alternative policy scenarios. Additionally, in our future work, we aim to deploy HS4 and HS6 AR analysis to influence production decisions at farm level, provide commodity-based tariff insights, and other potential pointers to economic policies. A digital platform with “bigger” data shall provide acute associations on commodities’ trade. HS4 or HS6 ARs for example, can point to some interesting Page 32 of 73 pairing of countries and commodities. HS4 and HS6 codes will produce many more AR rules, which require more computational power, something we anticipate to do in the future. 6 Policy Implications Methods presented in this paper provide ways of evaluating and managing policy scenarios. For instance, as presented in use cases 1 and 2, production of certain commodities can be hindered or amplified due to shifts in markets, changes in consumption, or other issues such as shipping and prices. Classification splits and gains lead to understanding these variables effects. Additionally, for instance: the amount of food available is calculated as the difference between available commodity supplies and nonfood use (i.e. disappearance) (USDA ERS, 2020): Total annual food supply of a commodity = supply (production + imports + beginning stocks) - disappearance (farm inputs + exports + ending stocks) (8) This (supply and use) allows analysts to produce reports that inform policy makers on commodities outlook, and so on policy decisions that influence variables per commodity. As presented in the two use cases and by using the presented EML and AR models, decision makers have better understanding of these variables, as they can predict them better, validate them and find outliers. Examples on policies across the world during outlier events include: 1. USA: a. The Covid-19 Food Assistance Program provides direct relief to producers who faced price declines and additional marketing costs due to the virus. b. The Office of Homeland Security has commenced a series of events to educate the Intelligence Community on threats to agriculture and the collection of information on emerging threats. Page 33 of 73 c. Local and Regional Food Aid Procurement: On March 26, 2019, Foreign Agricultural Service (FAS) announced up to $15 million funding opportunity for Local and Regional Food Aid Procurement. 2. Canada: a. Farm Credit banks will receive support from the federal government that will allow for an additional $5.2 billion in lending capacity to producers, agribusinesses, and food processors (IMF, 2020). 3. South Africa and India: a. New funds are available to assist producers under stress, mainly small-scale farmers operating in the poultry, livestock, and vegetables sectors (IMF, 2020). Policy on data sharing is critical to such studies. Encouraging government agencies to produce and share datasets on public repositories is essential for additional work in this context. 7 Conclusions In recent years, there has been a challenge to achieve consensus at international bodies such as the United Nations, World Trade Organization, and others. For instance, the Doha round of multilateral trade negotiations initiated in 2001 has not been concluded as of today. Some have argued that G20, a group of 20 nations that account for much of world’s GDP and population, has become increasingly assertive on multilateral policies. For instance, In Annex II of G20’s Strategy for Global Trade Growth (SGTG, 2020), the G20 declares developing a world trade outlook indicator, and promoting further e-commerce development. That includes an initiative on an electronic World Trade Platform (e-WTP). The EML model illustrated in this paper can allow for contrasting between decisions made by G20 (i.e. mostly countries of cluster 1 in our Page 34 of 73 analysis) versus engaging all countries like at the United Nations. The experimental work in this article indicates the high relevance of EML for predicting timely trade patterns with a greater accuracy than traditional approaches. In our work, we show that transactional agricultural trade data could be used to enable insights into policy making such as: if the U.S. is exporting beef to Mexico ⇒ Mexico will import less or no hay for animal feed (many other associations are presented). Similar to Market Basket Analysis (MBA) at grocery stores, trade trends for specific country-commodity pairs are directly affected by other “hidden” HS-2 commodity flows (confidence > 90%). Top world traders’ imports and exports data (such as G7 or G20 countries) perform better training and scoring of AI models when compared to all international trade data (R2 > 69%). Countries of the world are best clustered in 6 groups based on their trade patterns. The 6-clusters model has low inter-cluster distances but high intra-cluster distances; and it influences boosting models that result in better predictions than traditional governmental outlooks. EML and AR models can have a direct effect