for the management of economic and trade policies during outlier events, (4) a review of the most important ML methods used in economics, (5) countryspecific or commodity-specific trade predictions, and (6) an open source R dashboard that encompasses all the mentioned ML methods and visualizations. Sections 1.1 and 1.2 present the motivation for AR and EML modeling. The next section (2) provides a review of traditional econometrics and presents the state of the art in applying AI methods to trade analysis. Section 3 introduces the methods (EML and AR) as they are applied to trade data; and section 4 presents all experimental results. Section 5 incorporates methods for validation, anomaly detection, outlier events and their manifestations on predictions. Section 5 also shows two use cases for policy making as well as other ideas for future work. Discussions, trade policy implications, and conclusions are presented in section 6. 1.1 Beer and Diapers for International Trade The success of AR for online and brick and mortar commerce is undeniable. Amazon’s “people who bought this item are also interested in…” is a recommendation engine that tells us what items have been bought together. Many other success stories exist: the famous beer and diapers association at grocery stores, Netflix’s movie recommendations, Walmart’s placing of bananas next to cereal boxes, and Target’s predictions of pregnancy based on buying trends (MapR, 2020). Those commercial algorithms that use AR are referred to as MBA. In our work, we ask the question, can MBA through AR be applied to international trade? Can we look into trade of Page 4 of 73 commodities between countries and build associations that could manifest trade associations such as: “when the U.S. exports more Cereal to Mexico, Mexico will import less or no livestock and other animal products”. We look at trade flows and aim to illustrate how the waves of trade are influenced by an increase or decrease of commodity’s flow between countries. 1.2 EML for Country-Commodity Trade EML are meta-algorithms that combine several Machine Learning (ML) techniques into one model to decrease bias (such as through boosting) (Ke et al., 2017), and improve predictions (through using multiple methods). In this paper, we develop methods for trade predictions using boosting and k-means clustering. K-means clustering is a commonplace method for grouping items using non-conventional means. We cluster the countries of the world, and use the highest quality outputs of the k-means model to execute tailored predictions through boosting algorithms. Boosting is a class of ML methods based on the idea that a combination of simple classifiers (obtained by a weak learner) can perform better than any of the simple classifiers alone. Additionally, boosting is used to classify economic variables, and measure their influence on trade projections. A ranking of variables is presented per commodity to aid in understanding relationships between variables (for instance: GDP, Distance, and Population), and their effect on trade during conventional (white swan) and outlier (black swan) events. 2. AI and Econometrics Econometrics (and model calibration, and other empirical methods used by economists) aim to elucidate mechanisms and identify causalities, whereas AI aims to find patterns in the data. The challenge with the latter for any kind of forward-looking or policy analysis is the famous “Lucas Page 5 of 73 Critique”. Lucas (1976) argued that the economic parameters of traditional econometric models depended implicitly on expectations of the policy making process, and that they are unlikely to remain constant as events change and policymakers alter their behavior. In section 5, we present methods (for outlier detection and model’s retraining) that aid policy makers in such situations, and allow them to amend their policies. Section 2.1 presents an overview of AI methods applied to trade; and section 2.2 outlines traditional econometrics, and contrasts both paradigms. 2.1 Applying AI to Trade Few studies have applied ML methods to economics. Storm et al. (2019) provided a comprehensive review of AI methods deployed to applied economics; especially their potential in informing policy decisions. In 2013, Gevel et al. published a book called "the Nexus between Artificial Intelligence and Economics". It was one of the first few works that introduced agentbased computational economics (Gevel et al. 2013). One year later, Feng et al. (2014) studied economic growth in the Chinese province of Zhejiang using a neural networks model. Their method however, is very limited in scope, and proved difficult to deploy across other provinces in China or other geographical entities in other countries. Abadie et al. (2010) developed a similar model, but applied it to the rising tobacco economy in California. In 2016, Milacic et al. (2016) expanded the scope, and developed a model for growth in GDP including its major components: agriculture, manufacturing, industry, and services. See also Kordanuli et al. (2016) for an application of neural networks for GDP predictions. Falat et