density-based approaches can be generally used for outlier detection within a learning environment, however, for explainability and clarity purposes, in our presented boosting models, we present commodity-specific variable correlations to support policy making during outlier events. For example, some commodities infer that the GDP of the importer is the main influencer (via classification measures) of the size of trade between both countries. Other commodities exchange depends on distance or population and so on. Hence, by looking at commodity-specific changes (within different contexts), implications on policies that shape production, pricing, or consumption of that commodity could be altered in a more acute manner. Figure 7: IMF Global GDP Trends (2017-2021): Negative GDP for most countries in year 2020 5.1 Data during Black Swan Events In the aftermath of the Covid-19 pandemic, the Department of Justice (DOJ) subpoenaed the four largest meat packers in the US (Tyson, Cargill, JBS, National Beef). The DOJ looked into Page 25 of 73 allegations of price manipulation as prices paid to ranchers declined while retail meat prices rose. The “Big Four” meat packers account for more than 70% of beef processing in the U.S. (Dorsett, 2020). Outlier events affect economic variables, and so during such black swan events, predictions and forecasts ought to be modified. During outlier events, historical data become much less dependable. Timeliness of data is a critical practical challenge as well. To estimate the current and future macroeconomic effects of Covid-19’s uncertainties, we need measures that are available in real time, or nearly so. This kind of analysis can aid in avoiding a serious disruption to economic activity (Fan et al., 2020). During such events, analysis is performed in uncharted waters. Issues arise such as the need to use daily if not hourly data (but not monthly data) for pattern recognition and predictions. Additionally, decisions become timelier and need to be executed in a quick manner using real time analysis and on-demand analytics (Barro et al., 2020) (Eichenbaum et al., 2020). Accordingly, as established prior, commodities flow and trade are influenced differently by different economic variables. During outlier times, traditional models fail to re-learn in real time to provide an updated prediction based on hundreds of variables. The box below presents a milk and corn use case to shed a light on determinants of trade patterns of these commodities using boosting. Usecase#1: While all industries have been seriously affected by the Covid-19 pandemic, food and agriculture have been among the hardest hit segments of the U.S. economy. The primary reason lies in the composition of household food expenditures. The impacts of the pandemic appear to vary by commodity based on two critical issues: perishability and labor use. Perishables like milk are among the hardest hit. Specialty crops such as corn also depend on labor for growing and harvesting – both types of commodities are affected during outlier events. Figure 8 illustrates feature importance (using classification tree splits) for milk trade and compares that to corn. We consider commodity-specific distress during outlier events, for instance, on the biggest milk exporters: New Zealand, Germany and the U.S. If we know that GDP rates (as the IMF data showed) have sunk for those countries, and also, production is Page 26 of 73 reduced due to closures and shutdowns; while other variables such as language, distance, and trade agreements stay the same, we are able to retrain the model with updated values and produce new real-time predictions that are suitable for the context at hand. Figure 8: Economic variable importance for Milk and Corn (use case #1) Our analysis of variables effecting milk’s production can dictate policy decisions at the Dairy Margin Program (DMC) for instance, and associations of milk trade using our AR model. For example, through measures taken by USDA based on the Farm Bill (USDA, 2018), post Covid19, dairy producers are granted a different set of agricultural loans based on the negative projections for production. Not all economic variables are influential during a pandemic, while other are more important to consider during conventional times (such as distance) and during policy making (such as Page 27 of 73 tariffs and production). In our boosting models, we considered the following economic variables (o refers to origin, and d refers to destination): Distance, Population_d, GDP_d, GDP_o, Population_o, Colony_o, Colony_d, Landlocked_o, GATT membership_d, Landlocked_d, Member of EU_o, Hostility level_d, WTO membership_d, Hostility level_o, Member of EU_d, Sanction threat trade, Island_d, Sanction imposition trade, Island_o, Customs union agreement, Common language, FTA agreement, WTO membership_o, Preferential trading area goods, GATT membership_o, Environmental impact assessment, Preferential trading area services, Continguity, Polity_d, Language_d, Tariffs, Polity_o, Latitude_o, Latitude_d, Language_o, and Year (all used in Figure 8). By using AI methods, issues such as endogeneity are marginalized. Most traditional methods for high-dimensional statistics are based on the assumption that none of the regressors are