Public Policymaking for International Agricultural Trade using Association Rules and Ensemble Machine Learning Feras A. Batarseh*1 (corresponding author) batarseh@vt.edu Munisamy Gopinath2 m.gopinath@uga.edu Anderson Monken3, 4 anderson.e.monken@frb.gov Zhengrong Gu4 zg120@georgetown.edu 1Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (Virginia Tech); Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering; Arlington, VA, USA 2University of Georgia; Department of Agricultural and Applied Economics; Athens, GA, USA 3Federal Reserve Board of Governors; Washington, D.C., USA 4Georgetown University; Graduate School of Arts and Sciences; Washington, D.C., USA Page 1 of 73 Abstract: International economics has a long history of improving our understanding of factors causing trade, and the consequences of free flow of goods and services across countries. The recent shocks to the free-trade regime, especially trade disputes among major economies, as well as black swan events (such as trade wars and pandemics), raise the need for improved predictions to inform policy decisions. Artificial Intelligence (AI) methods are allowing economists to solve such prediction problems in new ways. In this manuscript, we present novel methods that predict and associate food and agricultural commodities traded internationally. Association Rules (AR) analysis has been deployed successfully for economic scenarios at the consumer or store level (such as for market basket analysis). In our work however; we present analysis of imports/exports associations and their effects on country-commodity trade flows. Moreover, Ensemble Machine Learning (EML) methods are developed to provide improved agricultural trade predictions, outlier events’ implications, and quantitative pointers to policy makers. Keywords: International Trade, Association Rules, Ensemble Machine Learning, CountryCommodity Transactions, Black Swan Events, Gravity Models. 1. Introduction In recent years, many countries are concerned about rising trade deficits (value of exports less imports) and their implications on production, consumption, prices, employment, and wages. For instance, the United States' goods and services trade deficit with China was $345.6 billion in 2019 (USTR, 2020). Such large gaps are forcing countries to either exit trade agreements or enforce tariffs, (e.g. Brexit, U.S. tariffs on Chinese goods, and other de-globalization movements). Other outlier events could lead to additional uncertainties in global production Page 2 of 73 chains and irregularities in trade of essential goods (e.g. soybeans, steel, aluminum, and beef). While traditional economic models aim to be reliable predictors, we consider the possibility that AI methods (such as AR and EML) allow for better predictions to inform policy decisions. The 2020 U.S. National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Bill states: “Artificial intelligence is a tool that has the potential to change and possibly transform every sector of the United States economy” (S.1558 – AIIA, 2020). As AI methods are applied across different domains, they are often presented with a stigma of being irrelevant or a “black-box”. Few studies have applied AI to economics; accordingly, some have called for increased attention to the role of AI tools (Mullainathan and Spiess, 2017). A study by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) points to the potential of economists adopting ML more than any other empirical strategy (Athey and Imbens, 2017). While some success stories are recorded for deploying ML to international trade analysis, we present methods that elevate predictions’ accuracy through EML, and evidence-based policy making through AR. Open-government data provide the fuel to power the mentioned methods. Unlike traditional approaches, e.g. expert-judgment based linear models or time-series methods, EML and AR methods provide a range of data-driven and interpretable projections. Prior studies indicate the high relevance of AI methods for predicting a range of economic relationships with a greater accuracy than traditional approaches (Athey and Agrawal, 2009). With recent international trade policies garnering attention for limiting cross-border exchange of essential goods and with trade’s critical effects on production, prices, employment, and wages (ERS, 2020), our motivation in this study is to test the following two-tier hypothesis: (a) Trade transactions can point to country-commodity associations (i.e. AR) that are not revealed by traditional economic models. (b) Trade patterns are predicted on time and with higher accuracy Page 3 of 73 if boosting models are using data from top world traders that are identified through clustering (i.e. EML). Our contributions are summarized as follows: (1) developing a novel AR method for international trade, (2) providing trade predictions using EML that are superior to existing public sector predictions, (3) ML methods for the management of economic and trade policies during outlier events, (4) a review of the most important ML methods used in economics, (5) countryspecific or commodity-specific trade predictions, and (6) an open source R dashboard that encompasses all the mentioned ML methods and visualizations. Sections 1.1 and 1.2 present the motivation for AR and EML modeling. The next section (2) provides a review of traditional econometrics and presents the state of the art in applying AI methods to trade analysis. Section 3 introduces the methods (EML and AR) as they are applied to trade data; and section 4 presents