EML models: data for EML are extracted from the General Agricultural Trade System (GATS) on the HS-4 level for prime agricultural commodities (years 1960-2018); from this web portal: https://apps.fas.usda.gov/gats/default.aspx. Finally, International Monetary Fund (IMF) data are collected for GDP statistics (https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/), and U.S. Department of Commerce data have been collected for example trade outliers in Livestock, and overall data and models’ validation Page 11 of 73 (presented in section 5). All cleaned datasets are shared in a public repository on Github (refer to the data availability statement). 3.1 AR for Trade Mining frequent commodities that trade in association with each other has a direct implication on decision making. AR is a popular method for discovering hidden relations between variables in big datasets. Piatetsky and Shapiro (1991) describe analyzing strong rules discovered in datasets. Based on the notion of strong rules, Agrawal et al. (1993) introduced the problem of mining association rules from transaction data. The idea of AR is as follows: Let X = {x , x , ..., x } be a set of n commodities. Let T = 1 2 n {t , t , ..., t } be a set of transactions (where Tt is the total number of transactions). Each 1 2 n transaction in T has a unique ID and contains a subset of the commodities (X) that are traded. A rule is defined as an implication of the form X ⇒ X where X ,X ⊆ X and X ∩ X = ∅. a b a b a b The sets of commodities X is called antecedents (left-hand-side or LHS) and the set of a commodities X is called consequents (right-hand-side or RHS) of the rule. b Besides antecedent-consequent rules, the quality of the associations is measured through the following three metrics: 𝑋 + 𝑋 𝑎 𝑏 Support = (1) 𝑇𝑡 𝑋 + 𝑋 Confidence = 𝑎 𝑏 (2) 𝑋 𝑎 (𝑋 + 𝑋 )/ 𝑋 Lift = 𝑎 𝑏 𝑎 (3) (𝑋 /𝑇𝑡) 𝑏 Support indicates that for example 67% of customers purchased beer and diapers together. Confidence is that 90% of the customers who bought beer also bought diapers (confidence is the Page 12 of 73 best indicator of AR). While lift represents the 28% increase in expectation that someone will buy diapers, when we know that they bought beer (i.e. lift is the conditional probability). In our study, AR mining is performed using the arules library in R. Data are pulled and processed from PostgreSQL. Transactions in the data represent each country-country pair’s trade for a given year. The goods in the data are the 96 commodity code trade dummies, which are boolean values depending on whether trade occurred for a specific country-country pair for a given year. Apriori association rules are collected with a minimum support of 0.35 and a maximum number of antecedents set to 3. Results are visualized in plotly and exported using R. The top 4 million+ rules are pulled out of the models, and migrated into a structured relational SQL database (called: AR-Trade). The rules are pulled for U.S. trade for top trade countries in Asia (China, Korea, and Japan); as well as the top trade countries in Europe (UK, Spain, France, and Germany). Relational SQL tables include the following columns: Lhs (antecedent), Rhs (consequent), Lhs name, Rhs name, Support, Confidence, Lift, Count, Country_O, Country_D. AR results are plotted using an R-Shiny dashboard, as well as R plots using the arulesViz library such as through this script: isS4(AR-Trade) AR-Trade@lhs plot(AR-Trade) Results are recorded and analyzed. The next section presents EML methods (clustering and boosting), and how they are deployed in experimental setup. 3.2 EML for Trade Python libraries are used to deploy three boosting trees (GBoost, XGBoost, and LightGBM) (Ke et al. 2017). Boosting trains weak learners sequentially, and in every cycle, each trying to correct Page 13 of 73 its predecessor. Our boosting models offer an alternative to econometric approaches, which are seldom cross-validated. K-means is used to cluster countries (to identify big world traders), different k values are used to improve the EML process, the best clustering model is chosen as input for the boosting algorithms. The k-means model is executed using Euclidean distances, where distance from p to q: d (p, q) = Sqrt ((q1-p1)2 + (q2-p2)2 + … + (qn-pn)2) (4) Countries in certain clusters can be better indicators to international trade flows, for example, the trade values of France have higher influence on the predictions quality than the trade values of Fiji. Accordingly, in this EML process, we identify the best k for clustering using silhouette coefficient and elbow diagram methods. Silhouette coefficient = max s(k). Where s(k) represents the mean s(i) over all data points in the trade dataset for a specific number of clusters k. The k-means model is