study-sites. This unique site iden- summarises the enrollment related statistics. tifier is used to generate features that track site enrollment performance in previous trials, as explained in detail in Section 3.2. 3. Methods Additionally, public data sources are used to aug3.1. Problem Definition ment the trial operational data, including age and gender inclusion criteria and number of trial arms from the AACT database (CTTI), and country population and population density data from The World Bank Group (World Bank). 2.2. Cohort Summary Our initial cohort contains over 11K trials that were initiated between 2008 and 2020 with at least 1 patient enrolled. Trials with potentially erroneous or incomplete data are removed, such as those with abnormally short enrollment duration (e.g., less than 4 Figure 1: Example Cumulative Site Enrollment 1. The sponsor of a clinical trial is the pharmaceutical companythatinitiatedandoversawthetrial. The aim of the present work is to predict the 2. ACROisacompanythatisoptionallycontractedtomanageclinicaltrialsforasponsor. monthly enrollment count for a clinical trial site 3. eCRF stands for electronic case report form. Its finaliza- throughout the study-site enrollment duration, i.e., tion date in the EDC system is used as a proxy for the from the study-site creation date until the target trialinitializationdate. enrollment for the trial has been reached. These 4. AdiseaseindicationcorrespondstooneormoreICD-9diseasecodes. Theseindicationsarehierarchicallycombined monthly site enrollment count predictions can then intoindicationgroupsandthenintotherapeuticareas. be aggregated to estimate country and study level 5. ThisisanEDCsystemdatethatcaptureswhenahealth- enrollment timelines. Of note, we use the observed carefacilityrecordisaddedtoatrialdatabase,usedasa study-site creation date for model training and evalproxy for the study-site activation date which marks the timefromwhichasitecanbeginenrolling. uation in the present work for simplicity; additional 2 A Machine Learning Approach for Recruitment Prediction in Clinical Trial Design informationregardingthepredictionoftimetostudy- meanhistoricalenrollmentrate6 observedforagiven site creation is provided in Section A.1. site within a given indication. If a site lacks history within a given indication, we impute the value hi3.2. Feature Generation erarchically starting from country and indication to indication, indication group and finally TA. We generate features at the study, country, and site The second baseline is an XGBoost (Chen and levels, as well as time-varying features at the siteGuestrin,2016)modeltrainedonsiteenrollmentrate monthlevel,usingsimilarmethodstocaptureperforwithatweedie(Jorgensen,1987)lossfunctionandthe mancefromrelevanthistoricaltrials. Relevanthistorstudy, country and site level features as described in icaltrialsincludethosethatcompletedenrollmentat Section 3.2. the same clinical trial site, within the same country, and/or had similar trial characteristics such as the Monthly Enrollment Prediction ModelsWeexTAorphase. Performancemetricsofinterestinclude plored three methods for this prediction problem: siteenrollmentrates,monthlysiteenrollmentcounts, LightGBM(Keetal.,2017)withatweedielossfuncsite query rates, and other data quality metrics. For tion, Zero-Inflated Poisson (ZIP) regression (Lamexample, to compute the mean historical enrollment bert, 1992), and a family of hurdle models (Cragg, rate by TA and country for a U.S. site in an oncol- 1971)withPoisson,truncatedPoissonornegativebiogy trial with an eCRF finalization date of January nomial count distributions. Selection of these meth10,2018,wewouldcomputethemeansiteenrollment ods was motivated primarily by the unique shape of rate of all study-sites in the U.S. that completed en- themonthlysiteenrollmentcountdistributionwhich rollmentinoncologytrialspriortoJanuary10, 2018. has a large mass at zero due to non-enrolling sites. Additional features aiming to estimate disease LightGBM offers additional advantages in handling prevalencearealsoderivedusinghistoricaltrialdata. non-linearrelationships,interactionsandmissingvalMore specifically, the indication disease prevalence is ues,aswellashavingafastertrainingtimethanother estimated globally and within each country by com- ensembled tree models like XGBoost. puting the percentage of patients enrolled in historical trials for a given indication compared to patients 3.4. Feature Selection and Processing for enrolled historically across all indications. Monthly Enrollment Prediction Models These historical features are often missing due to lack of historical trials within a particular set of Prior to model training, we apply a set of pregrouping variables. In general, we apply various processing steps, including winsorizing extreme valformsofhierarchicalimputationthatusevaluesfrom ues of the historical features, removing highly correfeatures with higher level groupings to impute miss- lated features, and pooling categorical features such ingvaluesforfeatureswithlowerlevelgroupings. For as indication. For the ZIP and hurdle models, adexample, for features that are grouped by indication, ditional steps are required such as imputing missing we impute missing values using the corresponding data, one-hot encoding categorical variables, removvalue at the indication group level, followed by the ing highly sparse variables, and normalizing feature TA level if missing values still exist. values. The final models contained 90 features,7 and To capture variation over time, we include a num- all site-month level features are preserved. ber of time related features at the study-site-month level such as the number of months since the studysite creation date, the calendar month and the num- 4. Result Summary ber of days in a given month. In total, our startThemodelingdatasetissplitrandomlybystudyinto ing feature set consists of roughly 100 study level, 30 discoveryandhold-outtestsetsusinga3:1ratio. The country level, 100 site level and 15 site-month level discovery set is then randomly split by study into features. 5 cross-validation folds. We conduct model hyperparameter tuning, including the selection of ZIP and 3.3. Models Baseline Models We develop two baseline models 6. Defined as the study-site enrollment count divided by study-siteenrollmentduration. withconstantstudy-sitelevelenrollmentratepredic7. About50studylevel,10countrylevel,25sitelevelfeatures tion for performance comparison. The first uses the