ProceedingsofMachineLearningResearchLEAVEUNSET:1–7,2021 MachineLearningforHealth(ML4H)2021 A Machine Learning Approach for Recruitment Prediction in Clinical Trial Design Jingshu Liu1∗ jingshu.liu@3ds.com Patricia J Allen2∗ pj.allen@3ds.com Luke Benz3 lukesbenz@gmail.com Daniel Blickstein1 daniel.blickstein@3ds.com Evon Okidi2 evon.okidi@3ds.com Xiao Shi1 xiao.shi@3ds.com 1350 Hudson Sreet 5F, New York, NY 10014 2110 High Street 6F, Boston, MA 02110 3170 Brookline Ave. Unit 425, Boston, MA 02215 Abstract in the trial design stage is needed to further reduce Significantadvancementshavebeenmadeinre- theriskoftrialrecruitmentdelaysandfailures(Briel cent years to optimize patient recruitment for et al., 2016; Healy et al., 2018). clinical trials, however, improved methods for Researchinthisfieldisoftenlimitedbythevolume patient recruitment prediction are needed to of clinical trial data to generate meaningful enrollsupport trial site selection and to estimate apment rate estimates and to validate proposed methpropriate enrollment timelines in the trial deods. A recent review by Gkioni et al. (2019) designstage. Inthispaper,usingdatafromthouscribed multiple statistical models that have been sandsofhistoricalclinicaltrials,weexploremaproposed over the years, however 11 out of the 13 rechine learning methods to predict the number viewed papers required investigator-provided enrollofpatientsenrolledpermonthataclinicaltrial siteoverthecourseofatrial’senrollmentdura- ment rate estimations to generate predictions in the tion. We show that these methods can reduce design stage. The remaining two papers either did theerrorthatisobservedwithcurrentindustry not validate their methods or only validated on a standardsandproposeopportunitiesforfurther smallsampleofstudies(Bakhshietal.,2013;Gajewimprovement. skietal.,2008). Additionally,manyofthesepastapKeywords: clinical trial, patient enrollment, proaches assume that enrollment rates are constant machine learning overtimeorevenacrosstrialsites,whichrarelyholds in practice. While it is likely that other approaches 1. Introduction exist,methodsandevaluationresultsforrecruitment prediction in clinical trials are rarely reported. A key success factor in clinical trials is the timely reIn this work, we propose a data driven, machine cruitment of trial participants. A 2020 study of 87 learning (ML) approach to predict site enrollment trials from the Tufts Center for the Study of Drug counts for every month over the course of a prospecDevelopmentsuggeststhateffortstooptimizetheretive clinical trial while accounting for variations in cruitment process in recent years have been successsite initiation times, seasonality, and other site and ful: enrollment timelines were within their target in study characteristics. This approach is based on pa77% of the studies sampled, increased from 48% in tient enrollment records from thousands of historical 2012 (Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Developclinical trials and enables predictions to be made usment, 2020). This study, however, was limited in ing only the characteristics of the prospective trial scope to a selected few large pharmaceutical compaandalistoftrialsites. Tothebestofourknowledge, nies, and other recent studies suggest that more prethis is the first reported application of ML for clinicise and granular prediction of patient recruitment cal trial enrollment prediction where performance of ∗ Theseauthorscontributedequallyandarealsocorrespond- multiplemethodsisevaluatedandreportedbasedon ingauthors a large number of trials. ©2021J.Liu1,P.J.Allen2,L.Benz3,D.Blickstein1,E.Okidi2 &X.Shi1. 1202 voN 41 ]GL.sc[ 1v70470.1112:viXra A Machine Learning Approach for Recruitment Prediction in Clinical Trial Design 2. Data months), missing or misaligned key enrollment milestone dates, and/or unknown therapeutic area (TA). 2.1. Data Sources Trials with likely bulk-uploaded enrollment data are Medidata’s Electronic Data Capture (EDC) system detected and excluded, such as those with over 90% integrates clinical trial operational data from various ofsubjectsenrolledinthesamecalendarmonth. Cersponsors1 or contract research organizations (CRO2) taintypesofstudiesareexcludedbecauseoftheirdisand disease areas globally. To predict trial enroll- tinctenrollment patternsorlimiteddataavailability, ment we leverage the operational data at the trial including observational, pediatric and device trials. (i.e., “study”), trial site (i.e., “study-site”) and pa- Table 2 in the appendix summarizes the number of tient levels, such as 1) trial eCRF finalization date3, studies, study-sites and patients after each filtering disease indication4, phase, sponsor and/or CRO; 2) step. study-site creation date5, country; 3) patient enroll- The final modeling dataset contains about 1.2 milment status and enrollment date. All patient data lionenrolledpatientsfrom7,542trialsandover270K has been removed or anonymized, and trial sponsors study-sites. The trials span over 400 sponsors, 80 and/or CROs have granted Medidata authorization CROs, 15 TAs, 600 indications and phase I through to use this combined operational data for research IV. Oncology is the largest TA (43% of studies), and purposes. phase II and III are the dominating phases (30% Medidata Acorn AI has invested substantially in and 43% of studies, respectively). Over 18K unique standardizing site metadata across trials. By the healthcare facilities from over 90 countries are reptime the data was generated for this work, about resented, with the U.S. being the most represented 20K unique healthcare facilities have been identified country(40%ofstudy-sites). Table3intheappendix across over 500K study-sites. This unique site iden- summarises the enrollment related statistics. tifier is used to generate features that track site enrollment performance in previous trials, as explained in detail in Section 3.2. 3. Methods Additionally, public data sources are used to aug3.1. Problem Definition ment the trial operational data, including age and gender inclusion criteria and number of trial arms from the AACT database (CTTI), and country population and population density data from The World Bank Group (World Bank). 2.2. Cohort Summary Our initial cohort contains over 11K trials that were initiated between 2008 and 2020 with at least 1 patient