tail clients with fitting the population average. To circumvent this issue, we use a similar idea to the one of [64] where a family of models is trained simultaneously for various levels, and each test client can tune its tail threshold. ∆-FL vs. Model Personalization. Consider a family of distributions q (x,y) for i=1,...,n over inputi output pairs. From the decomposition q (x,y)=q (x)q (y x), it follows that the heterogeneity of the joint i i i distributions can be due to (a) heterogeneity of the marg|inal distributions q (x) over the input x, or, (b) i heterogeneity of the conditional distributions q (y x), or in other words, the input-output mapping. i If two clients do not agree on their input-ou|tput mapping, a single global model cannot serve both simultaneously. Thus, when training one single global model (as in vanilla FL) or a small number of them (as in ∆-FL), there is an implicit assumption that the heterogeneity of q (y x) : i [n] is small. ∆-FL i was designed to handle the heterogeneity of q (x) better than vanilla F{L by|provid∈ing b}etter worst-case i performance on tail clients. On the other hand, the cases where the heterogeneity of the conditional distributions q (y x) is large i requires a separate model per client, or in other words, model personalization. Standard approache|s to model personalization still aim to minimize the average error across all clients [27, 78], similar to the vanilla FL objective. Thus, it can still suffer from disparate performance across clients, including poor performance on some tail clients or data-poor clients. One solution to reduce this disparity is to combine personalization with the ∆-FL objective. We refer to Section 7.6 for numerical experiments. Quantile-based Filtering and Client Availability. We note that the quantile-based filtering of Algorithm 3 implies that only θm tail clients contribute their updates to the global model in the absence of noise (thatis,theweightπ(t) inline3ofAlgorithm3issparse; seealsoTheorem3). Inordertoincludetheupdates of m(cid:48) clients after filtering, ∆-FL would require initially sampling an initial cohort of m=m(cid:48)/θ clients. On the other hand, clients in cross-device federated learning are typically available in a diurnal pattern [34, 50], where a large enough number of clients might not be available at certain times of the day. This issue might be exacerbated by ∆-FL’s requirement of m(cid:48)/θ clients per round as compared to FedAvg’s m(cid:48). Devising strategies to dynamically vary the tail threshold θ based on the number of available clients to overcome this issue is an interesting venue for future work. 19 Table 1: Dataset description and statistics. Task Dataset #Classes Devices #Data per client Median Max Image Recognition EMNIST 62 1730 179 447 Sentiment Analysis Sent140 2 877 69 549 7 Experiments In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of ∆-FL in handling heterogeneity in federated learning. Our experiments were implemented in Python using automatic differentiation provided by PyTorch while the data was preprocessed using LEAF [13]. The code to reproduce our experiments can be found online. We start by describing the datasets, tasks, and models in Section 7.1. We present numerical comparisons to several recent works – we list them in Section 7.2 and show the experimental results in Section 7.3. We demonstratethat∆-FLprovidesthemostfavorabletradeoffbetweenaverageerrorandtheerrorontailclients in Section 7.4. Next, we compare ∆-FL with model personalization in Section 7.5. Finally, we numerically study the privacy-utility tradeoff of the differentially private quantile computation (in Section 7.6), and of ∆-FL with end-to-end differential privacy (in Section 7.7). Full details regarding the experiments, as well as additional results, are provided in the supplementary material. 7.1 Datasets, Tasks and Models We consider two learning tasks. The dataset and task statistics are summarized in Table 1. (a) Character Recognition: We use the EMNIST dataset [19], where the input x is a 28 28 grayscale image of a handwritten character, and the output y is its label (0-9, a-z, A-Z). Each clie×nt is a writer of the character x. The weight α assigned to author i is the number of characters written by this author. We i train both a linear model and a convolutional neural network architecture (ConvNet). The ConvNet consists of two 5 5 convolutional layers with max-pooling followed by one fully connected layer. Outputs are vectors of sco×res for each of the 62 classes. The multinomial logistic loss is used to train both models. (b) Sentiment Analysis: We use the Sent140 dataset [39] where the input x is a tweet, and the output y = 1 is its sentiment. Each client is a distinct Twitter user. The weight α assigned to user i is the numb±er i of tweets published by this user. We train a logistic regression and a Long-Short Term Memory neural network architecture (LSTM). The LSTM is built on the GloVe embeddings of the words of the tweet [45]. The hidden dimension of