Federated Learning with Superquantile Aggregation for Heterogeneous Data Krishna Pillutla∗1 Yassine Laguel∗2 Jérôme Malick3 Zaid Harchaoui4 1Google Research 2Rutgers University 3CNRS 4University of Washington Abstract We present a federated learning framework that is designed to robustly deliver good predictive performance across individual clients with heterogeneous data. The proposed approach hinges upon a superquantile-based learning objective that captures the tail statistics of the error distribution over heterogeneous clients. We present a stochastic training algorithm that interleaves differentially private client filtering with federated averaging steps. We prove finite time convergence guarantees for the √ algorithm: O(1/ T) in the nonconvex case in T communication rounds and O(exp(−T/κ3/2)+κ/T) in the strongly convex case with local condition number κ. Experimental results on benchmark datasets for federated learning demonstrate that our approach is competitive with classical ones in terms of average error and outperforms them in terms of tail statistics of the error. 1 Introduction Federated learning is a distributed machine learning framework where many clients (e.g. mobile devices) collaboratively train a model under the orchestration of a central server (e.g. service provider) while keeping the training data private and local to the client throughout the training process [67, 50]. It has found widespread adoption across industry [9, 75] for applications ranging from smart device apps [102, 42] to healthcare [11, 46]. A key feature of federated learning is the statistical heterogeneity, i.e., client data distributions are not identically distributed [50, 62]. In typical cross-device federated learning scenarios, each client corresponds to a user. The diversity in the data they generate reflects the diversity in their unique personal, cultural, regional, and geographical characteristics. This data heterogeneity in federated learning manifests itself as a train-test distributional shift. Indeed, the usual approach minimizes the prediction error of the model on average over the population of clients available for training [67] while at test time, the same model is deployed on individual clients. This approach can fail on clients whose data distribution is far from most of the population or who may have less data than most of the population. It is highly desirable, therefore, to have a federated learning method that can robustly deliver good predictive performance across a wide variety of natural distribution shifts posed by individual clients. We present in this paper a robust approach to federated learning that guarantees a minimum level of predictive performance to all clients, even in situations where the population is heterogeneous. The method we develop addresses these issues by minimizing a learning objective based on the notion of a superquantile [84, 87], a risk measure that captures the tail behavior of a random variable. Training models with a learning objective involving the superquantile raises challenges. The superquantile is a non-smooth functional with sophisticated properties. Furthermore, the superquantile function can be seen as a kind of nonlinear expectation that we would like to blend well with averaging mechanisms. We show how to address the former by leveraging the dual formulation and the latter by leveraging the tail-domain ∗Theseauthorscontributedequallytothiswork. 1 2202 ceD 6 ]GL.sc[ 2v92490.2112:viXra Trajectoriesofmodelparametersovertime Iteration → .marapledoM → Initerationtoftraining Attesttime Server Server w0 w θ1 w θ2 + Sec.Agg. w θ3 w θ4 selected clients θ1 θ2 θ3 θ4 testclientsselecttheirtailthresholdθ Figure 1: Schematic summary of the ∆-FL framework. Left: The server maintains multiple models w , one for θj each tail thresholdθ . Middle: During training, selected clients participate in training each model w . Individual j θj updates are securely aggregated to update the server model. Right: Each test user is allowed to select their tail threshold θ, and are served the corresponding model w . θ viewpoint. As a result, we can obtain an algorithm that can be implemented in a similar way to FedAvg [67] yet offers important benefits to heterogeneous populations. The approach we propose, ∆-FL, allows one to control higher percentiles of the distribution of errors over the heterogeneous population of clients. We show in the experiments that our approach is more efficient than a direct approach, simply seeking to minimize the worst error over the population of clients. Compared to FedAvg, ∆-FL delivers improved prediction to tail clients or data-poor clients. Our algorithm relies on differentially private quantile computation to filter out clients on which to run federated averaging steps. We present finite-time theoretical convergence guarantees for our algorithm when used to train additive models or deep networks and prove bounds on the privacy and utility of the algorithm. 1.1 Contributions We make the following concrete contributions in this work. The ∆-FL Framework. The usual objective of federated learning, which we call the vanilla FL objective is n 1 (cid:88) λ min F (w)+ w 2, (1) i w∈Rd n 2(cid:107) (cid:107) i=1 where F i (w)=Eξ∼qi [f(w;ξ)] is the expected loss on client i under its data distribution q i for i=1,...,n,