and tasks. • Appendix C.2 presents the algorithm and the hyperparameters used. • Appendix C.3 details the evaluation methodology. • Appendix C.4 gives the experimental comparison of ∆-FL to baselines. Sinceeachclienthasafinitenumberofdatapointsintheexamplesbelow,weletitsprobabilitydistribution q to be the empirical distribution over the available examples, and the weight α to be proportional to the i i number of datapoints available on the client. C.1 Datasets and Tasks We use the two following datasets, described in detail below. The data was preprocessed using LEAF [13]. EMNIST for handwritten-letter recognition. Dataset. EMNIST [19] is a character recognition dataset. This dataset contains images of handwritten digits or letters, labeled with their identification (a-z, A-Z, 0-9). The images are grey-scaled pictures of 28 28=784 pixels. × Train and Test Devices. Each image is also annotated with the “writer” of the image, i.e., the human subject who hand-wrote the digit/letter during the data collection process. Each client corresponds to one writer. From this set of clients, we discard all clients containing less than 100 images. The remaining clients were partitioned into two groups — 1730 training and 1730 testing clients. For each experiment, we subsampled 865 training and 865 testing clients for computational tractability, where the sampled clients vary based on the random seed of each experiment. Model. We consider the following models for this task. 42 • Linear Model: We use a linear softmax regression model. In this case, each F is convex. We i train parameters w R 62×784. Given an input image x R 784, the score of each class c [62] is the dot product w ∈ ,x . The probability p assigned to e∈ach class is then computed as a∈softmax: c c p p c ro = ba e b x il p it(cid:104)y w . c ,x (cid:105) / (cid:80)(cid:104) c(cid:48) ex (cid:105) p (cid:104) w c(cid:48),x (cid:105) . The prediction for a given image is then the class with the highest • ConvNet: We also consider a convolutional neural network with two convolutional layers with maxpooling and one fully connected layer (F.C) which outputs a vector in 62. The outputs of the ConvNet R arescoreswithrespecttoeachclass. Theyarealsousedwithasoftmaxoperationtocomputeprobabilities. The loss used to train both models is the multinomial logistic loss L(p,y)= logp where p denotes the y vector of probabilities computed by the model and p denotes its yth component−. In the convex case, we add y a quadratic regularization term of the form (λ/2) w 2. (cid:107) (cid:107)2 Sent140 for Sentiment Analysis. Dataset. Sent140 [39] is a text dataset of 1,600,498 tweets produced by 660,120 Twitter accounts. Each tweet is represented by a character string with emojis redacted. Each tweet is labeled with a binary sentiment reaction (i.e., positive or negative), which is inferred based on the emojis in the original tweet. Train and Test Devices. Each client represents a Twitter account and contains only tweets published by this account. From this set of clients, we discarded all clients containing less than 50 tweets and split the 877 remaining clients into a train set and a test set of sizes 438 and 439 respectively. This split was held fixed for all experiments. Each word in the tweet is encoded by its 50-dimensional GloVe embedding [77]. Model. We consider the following models. • Linear Model: We consider a l -regularized linear logistic regression model where the parameter vector 2 w is of dimension 50. In this case, each F is convex. We summarize each tweet by the average of the i GloVe embeddings of the words of the tweet. • RNN: The nonconvex model is a Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) model [45] built on the GloVe embeddings of the words of the tweet. The hidden dimension of the LSTM is the same as the embedding dimension, i.e., 50. We refer to it as “RNN”. The loss function is the binary logistic loss. C.2 Algorithms and Hyperparameters Algorithm and Baselines. The proposed ∆-FL is run for three values of θ 0.8,0.5,0.1 . We compare it to the following baselines: ∈{ } • FedAvg [67]: It is the de facto standard for the vanilla federated learning objective. • FedAvg, θ: We also consider FedAvg with a random client subselection step: local updates are run on a fraction of the initial number of clients randomly selected per round. For each dataset, we try three values, corresponding to the average number of clients selected by ∆-FL for the three values of θ used. In the main paper, we report as FedAvg-Sub the performance of FedAvg, θ with θ 0.8,0.5,0.1 which gives the best performance on ∆-FL (i.e., lowest 90th percentile of test misclassific∈at{ion error). H}ere we report numbers for all values of θ considered. • FedProx [63]: It augments FedAvg with a proximal term but still minimizes the vanilla federated learning objective. • q-FFL [64]: It raises