a fraction of the initial number of clients randomly selected per round. For each dataset, we try three values, corresponding to the average number of clients selected by ∆-FL for the three values of θ used. In the main paper, we report as FedAvg-Sub the performance of FedAvg, θ with θ 0.8,0.5,0.1 which gives the best performance on ∆-FL (i.e., lowest 90th percentile of test misclassific∈at{ion error). H}ere we report numbers for all values of θ considered. • FedProx [63]: It augments FedAvg with a proximal term but still minimizes the vanilla federated learning objective. • q-FFL [64]: It raises the per-client losses to the power (1+q), where q 0 is a parameter, in order to focus on clients with higher loss. We run q-FFL for values of q in 10j,j ≥ 3,...,1 . { ∈{− }} 43 • AFL[71]: Itaimstominimizetheworstper-clientloss. Weimplementitasanasymptoticversionofq-FFL, using a large value of q, as this was found to yield better convergence with comparable performance [64]. In the experiments, we take q =10.0. The experiments are conducted on the datasets described in Appendix C.1. Hyperparameters. Rounds. We measure the progress of each algorithm by the number of calls to secure aggregation routine for weight vectors, i.e., the number of communication rounds. For the experiments, we choose the number of communication rounds depending on the convergence of the optimization for FedAvg. For the EMNIST dataset, we run the algorithm for 3000 communication rounds with the linear model and 1000 for the ConvNet. For the Sent140 dataset, we run the 1000 communication rounds for the linear model and 600 for the RNN. Devices per Round. We choose the same number of clients per round for each method, with the exception of FedAvg,θ. All clients are assumed to be available and selections are made uniformly at random. In particular, we select 100 clients per round for all experiments with the exception of Sent140 RNN for which we used 50 clients per round. Local Updates and Minibatch Size. Each selected client locally runs 1 epoch of mini-batch stochastic gradient descent locally. We used the default mini-batch of 10 for all experiments [67], except for 16 for EMNIST ConvNet. This is because the latter experiments were run using on a GPU, as we describe in the section on the hardware. Learning rate scheme. We now describe the learning rate γ used during LocalUpdate. For the linear t model, we used a constant fixed learning rate γ γ , while for the neural network models, we used a step t 0 decay scheme of the learning rate γ t =γ 0 c−(cid:98)t/t0(cid:99) ≡for some t 0 where γ 0 and 0<c 1 are tuned. We tuned the learning rates only for the baseline FedAvg and used the same learning rate fo≤r the other baselines and ∆-FL at all values of θ. For the neural network models, we fixed t so that the learning rate decayed once or twice during the 0 fixed time horizon T. In particular, we used t =400 for EMNIST ConvNet (where T =1000) and t =200 0 0 for Sent140 RNN (where T =600). We tuned c from the set 2−3,2−2,2−1,1 , while the choice of the range of γ depended on the dataset-model pair. The tuning criterio{n we used was th}e mean of the loss distribution 0 over the training clients (with client i weighted by α ) at the end of the time horizon. That is, we chose the i γ ,c which gave the best terminal training loss. 0 Tuning of the regularization parameter. The regularization parameter λ for linear models was tuned with cross validation from the set 10−k : k 3,...,8 . This was performed as described below. For each dataset, we held out h{alf the tra∈in{ing clien}ts}as validation clients. Then, for different values of the regularization parameter, we trained a model with the (smaller subset of) training clients and evaluate its performance on the validation clients. We selected the value of the regularization parameter as the one which gave the smallest 90th percentile of the misclassification error on the validation clients. Baselines Parameters. We tune the proximal parameter of FedProx with cross validation. The procedure we followed is identical to the procedure we described above for the regularization parameter λ. The set of parameters tested is 10−j,j 0,...,3 . We did not attempt to tune the parameter q of q-FFL and report the performance of a{ll values∈of{ q which}w}e tried. Hyperparameters of ∆-FL. We optimize ∆-FL via Algorithm 3 with a fixed number of local steps, corresponding to one epoch. For simplicity, we calculate the quantile exactly, assuming client losses are available to the server. 44 Table 6: Metrics for the test misclassification error for EMNIST (Linear Model). Method Mean StandardDeviation 10th Percentile Median 90th Percentile FedAvg 34.38 0.38 18.39 0.33 21.54