formalize the loss of privacy of an individual user in releasing population-level aggregates. DP-FedAvg [68], a differentially private variant of FedAvg, is also implemented in industrial systems [79]. Recent contributions in this direction include differential privacy mechanism compatible with secure aggregation [49, 1] and improving privacy-utility tradeoffs of federated learning with personalization [47, 7]. 3 Problem Setup We begin this section by recalling the standard setup of federated learning in Section 3.1. We then describe the standard approach to federated learning and its associated optimization, FedAvg [67] in Section 3.2. We then define the superquantile in Section 3.3. 3.1 Federated Learning Setup Federated learning consists of heterogeneous clients who collaboratively train a machine learning model under the orchestration of a central server. The model is then deployed to all clients, including those not seen during training. Let the vector w R d denote the d model parameters. We assume that each client has a distribution q over some data spa∈ce such that the data on the client is sampled i.i.d. from q. The loss incurred by the model w R d on this client is F(w;q):=Eξ∼q [f(w;ξ)], where f(w;ξ) is the chosen loss function, such as the logistic lo∈ss, on input-output pair ξ under the model w. The expectation above is assumed to be well-defined and finite. For a given distribution q, smaller values of F(;q) denote a better fit of the model to the data. There are n clients available for training. We number th·ese clients as 1,...,n and denote the distribution on training client i by q . We denote the loss on client i by F (w):=F(w;q ). i i i The goal of federated learning is to train a model w so that it achieves good performance when deployed on each test client, including those unseen during training. Owing to the statistical heterogeneity of federated 5 learning,thedistributionpofaspecifictestclientcouldbedifferentfromtheaveragedistribution(1/n) (cid:80)n q i=1 i that the model is trained on. Each federated learning method is characterized by an objective function and the federated optimization algorithm used to minimize it. It is not possible to achieve good performance on each client simultaneously with a single model w, as it would be a difficult multiobjective optimization problem. The usual approach is to combine the per-client losses into a scalar and minimize this objective. The choice of the objective function and optimization algorithm is primarily determined by the three key aspects of federated learning [50, 62]: (1) Communication Bottleneck: The repeated exchange of massive models between the server and clients over resource-limited wireless networks makes communication a critical bottleneck. Therefore, training algorithms should be able to trade off more local computation for a lower communication cost. (2) Statistical Heterogeneity: The training distribution q and a specific test distribution p are likely to be i different from each other. Therefore, a model which works well on average over all test clients might not work well on each individual test client. (3) Privacy: The data on each client is highly privacy-sensitive. Federated learning is designed to protect data privacy since no user data is transferred to a data center. This privacy is enhanced by secure aggregation of model parameters, which refers to aggregating client updates such that no client update is directly revealed to any other client or the server. This is achieved by cryptographic protocols based on secure multiparty communication [8]. 3.2 Federated Learning and the FedAvg algorithm Analogous to the classical expectation-based objective function in the empirical risk minimization approach, the standard objective in federated learning is to minimize the average loss on the training clients n 1 (cid:88) λ min F (w)+ w 2, (3) i w∈Rd n 2(cid:107) (cid:107) i=1 where λ 0 is a regularization parameter. We will call this objective the vanilla FL objective. The d≥e facto standard training algorithm is FedAvg [67]. Each round of the algorithm consists of the following steps: (a) The server samples a set S of m clients from [n] and broadcasts the current model w(t) to these clients. (b) Staring from w(t) =w(t), each client i S makes τ local gradient descent steps with a learning rate γ: i,0 ∈ w(t) =w(t) γ F (w(t)). i,k+1 i,k− ∇ i i,k In practice, one could also use local stochastic gradient steps, but we restrict ourselves to local full gradient steps for simplicity. (c) The models from the selected clients are sent to the server and aggregated to update the server model 1 (cid:88) w(t+1) = w(t) . m k,τ i∈S FedAvg addresses the communication bottleneck by using τ >1 local computation steps as opposed to τ =1 local steps in minibatch SGD. It also securely performs the averaging step (c) to enhance data privacy. However, the vanilla FL objective places a limit on how well statistical heterogeneity can be addressed. By minimizing the