not the best learner of all possible learners A, no further resources should be committed to training learner a. Note that, even though the terms are frequently mixed up in literature, this is very different from early stopping, in which the convergence of the curve of a single learner is considered in isolation (cf. Fig. 1). Early discarding has been applied to both observation (Adriaensen et al, 2023;MohrandvanRijn,2021,2023;Ruhkopfetal,2023)anditeration(Adriaensenetal,2023;Domhanetal,2015;Kleinetal,2017b;Ruhkopfetal,2023; Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 27 Swersky et al, 2014) learning curves. In the first case, one is sampling from (a, ) at different anchors n and hopes to be able to drop sub-optimal canC · didates at n b anchors (much) smaller than the target size b . In the ref ref ≪ second case, one always uses the complete dataset (or at least all data designated for training, say n), observes samples of (a,n, ) for different anchors C · (maybe epochs) t, and seeks to avoid convergence if it can be foreseen that the convergence performance will be sub-optimal. Earlydiscardingismoreaggressivethanearlystoppingbecauseitdoesnot need to wait until the learning curve converges. On the contrary, one tries to avoid reaching convergence since this is considered a waste of resources in the casethatthelearnerperformssub-optimal.Inanextremecaseanddepending onavailableknowledgeaboutlearners(cf.Sec.4.3),onecouldonlyuseasingle point of an empirical learning curve to discard a candidate. Situations in which early discarding plays a role can be further classified into horizontal and vertical scenarios (and a mixture of the two): 1. Horizontal Model Selection. Horizontal model selection implies an apriori fixed finite set of learning algorithms, from which one has to be selected. Empiricallearningcurvesaregrowniterativelyforthewholesetorshrinking subsets of it. Successive halving and related works are a prominent example of horizontal decision making (Van den Bosch, 2004; Jamieson and Talwalkar, 2016). However, these approaches only consider the last anchor point (rather than the complete learning curve). 2. Vertical Model Selection. Vertical means that the set of learners is generallynotlimitedtoafiniteset,andthesetofevaluated learnercandidates evolvesovertime(i.e.,notfixedapriori).Learnersareevaluatedoneafter another.Eachlearnerisevaluatedinaniterativefashiontogrowalearningcurveandallowforearlydiscarding.Examplesaretheearlydiscarding routine for deep networks by Domhan et al (2015) or, more generally, for learning curve cross-validation (Mohr and van Rijn, 2021, 2023). 3. Diagonal Model Selection. This case is similar to the vertical decisionmaking situation with the difference that one does allow to continue the evaluation of a candidate at a later point. Hence, candidates are not evaluated one after another, but the evaluation of different candidates canbeinterleaved.ExamplesareBayesianoptimisation-basedapproaches to pause and continue evaluations of (not necessarily iterative) learners (Klein et al, 2017a; Swersky et al, 2014). Non-iterative learners must be trained from scratch with the increased budget. Another approach that addresses this type of decision-making situation is Hyperband (Li et al, 2017) and Bayesian optimisation based on progressive sampling (Zeng and Luo, 2017). However, neither of these approaches considers learning curves even though they implicitly construct them. Decisions are taken based on the observations of the largest anchor point considered so far. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 28 Learning Curves for Decision Making 4.2 Technical Questions Asked About Learning Curves A plethora of questions can be asked about learning curves. Fig. 10 gives an overview of these questions. The figure is organised in three layers (depth dimension) corresponding to the three types of estimates discussed in Sec. 3. Each layer consists of a set of questions that can be posed about learning curves. From bottom to top, the questions are ordered by complexity, and an arrow from one question to another indicates that the question with the incoming arrow is more general. Answering the more general question also implies answering the less general question. In the simplest case, we can answer a binary question. There are four relevantquestions,i.e.,(i)whethersomespecificanchorpoint,e.g.,thedataset size,isbeyondthesaturationpoint(b b ),(ii)whethertheperformance sat ref ≤ of a learner at the saturation point is better than some baseline τ (p sat ≤ τ), (iii) whether the performance p := (a,b ) at some reference point ref ref C b is better than some threshold τ, or (iv) whether a specific anchor point ref is beyond the utility-based stopping point (bu < b ). To our knowledge, sat ref the only approaches in this category are those implicitly answering question (iii) by discarding candidates that are not believed to be competitive (see, e.g., Jamieson and Talwalkar, 2016; Petrak, 2000; Zeng and Luo, 2017); here τ = min (a,b ) is the (unknown) best performance of any learner on a A ref ∈ C the target size. Afamilyofslightlymoregeneralquestionstriestoorder asetAoflearning algorithms w.r.t. their performance at some (future) anchor b . We denote ref this ordering as π (a,b ). Here, b is typically the maximum availa A ref ref ∈ ∼C able training data, even if an iteration-wise curve is considered because then thisistheterminationperformanceofthatcurve.Inthesimplestcase,wecould ask for a concrete pair of two learning algorithms a , a whether (a ,b ) 1 2 1 ref C ≥ (a ,b ),i.e.,whichwillperformbetteratsomereferencepoint.Forexample, 2 ref C the work by Leite and Brazdil