most general ones developed todate regardinglearning curves inthat theycreate amodel forthe complete function ,i.e.,generalisingbothoverbothbudgetsandlearners.Suchamodel C is so versatile that it can be used in all types of decision-making situations, e.g.,dataacquisition,earlystopping,andearlydiscarding.Additionally,these can be used for model acquisition (selecting a yet unseen promising model). Freeze-thawBayesianoptimisationmodelsthebehaviouroflearningcurves through Gaussian processes (Swersky et al, 2014). An important contribution of that work is a non-stationary kernel for Gaussian processes that supports exponentially decaying learning curve models; it can easily be checked that standard kernels like a linear or Gaussian kernel do not lead to meaningful learning curve models. Assuming that the kernel reflects the model class appropriately, one additional benefit of using a Gaussian process is that one automatically obtains estimates for the noise σ2 at an arbitrary anchor b. a,b Using their kernel and the current set of observations, Swersky et al (2014) estimate the asymptotic mean performance p . Since the learning curves are sat combined with Bayesian optimisation, the uncertainty for a specific future anchor is one of the required inputs for computing their acquisition function. In a rather thin evaluation, the approach was successfully applied to Online Latent Dirichlet Allocation, Logistic Regression, and Probabilistic Matrix Factorization, considering one dataset per learner. While the paper focused on iteration-wise curves, the modelling technique can also be used for sample-wise curves. Klein et al (2017a) presented a similar approach dubbed FABOLAS. Similar to Freeze-thaw Bayesian optimisaion, a Gaussian process is used to model Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 51 the learning curve of the learners across different hyperparameter configurations. There are three main differences between the two approaches as far as learningcurvesareconcerned.First,FABOLASconsiderssample-wise curves, while freeze-thaw Bayesian optimisation considers iteration-wise curves. Second, and related to this, FABOLAS uses a kernel different from freeze-thaw Bayesian optimisation to model the behaviour of the learning curve using the Gaussianprocess,whichisdefinedbytherelativedatasetsizein[0,1]insteadof absolutesizes.Third,FABOLAStriestoexplicitlylearnthecompletelearning curve, while freeze-thaw Bayesian optimisation focuses only on the saturation performance. Similar to freeze-thaw Bayesian optimisation, the uncertainty about the performance estimates of the learning curve is not explicitly used. Still, the fact that a Gaussian process is fitted from the data allows one to make assertions about the certainty of the learning curve value at any point. Parallel to their work on FABOLAS, Klein et al (2017b) proposed an approach to estimate both the mean and the noise (aleatoric uncertainty) of a learning curve through the notion of Bayesian neural networks. The neural network predicts the parameters of a set of basis functions. These basis functions incorporate prior knowledge into the network, which is necessary to extrapolate away from the data. The main difference between this approach andtheaforementionedapproachesisthatthisapproachmodelsthebehaviour of the learning curve through a neural network. This network has d+1 input units (d for the algorithm description and one for the anchor), one output unit for the estimated performance and, optionally, one output unit for the estimate of the variance of the performance (which relates to aleatoric uncertainty).Toourknowledge,thisapproachandthelearningcurveextrapolation proposed by Domhan et al (2015) are the only approaches in this area that explicitly model the variance of the performance of the learning curve (i.e., which can also be seen as noise). An important difference between the two is that Klein et al (2017b) assume heteroscedastic noise, i.e., noise that changes with both different hyperparameters and anchors, while Domhan et al (2015) assume homoscedastic noise across anchor sizes (not across configurations, becausethemodeldoesnotgeneraliseoverdifferentconfigurations).Whilethe approach presented in the paper does not explicitly consider the uncertainty about the parameter estimates, the parameters are essentially sampled from a posterior distribution. Therefore, the uncertainty is at least implicitly available. However, it should be noted that the number of parameters describing the model here, namely the network weights, is potentially much larger than in the approach taken by Domhan et al (2015). Wistuba and Pedapati (2019) propose to use biased matrix factorisation to model (, ). The approach is settled in the context of neural architecture C · · search. Knowledge from previous datasets and different architectures is used to estimate the performance of new architectures on the target dataset, and this estimate is used to drive a Bayesian optimisation approach. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 52 Learning Curves for Decision Making Table 1: Overview of the discussed learning curve approaches, ordered along the most general question they address, the learning curve type and the data resourcesused(4columns).Intheheader,‘LC’standsforlearningcurve,‘DS’ stands for dataset, and ‘AL’ stands for algorithm. All of them use partial empiricalcurvesonthetargetdatasetofthecurrentlearner(s).Estimatetype: p,r,d are point, range and distribution estimates, respectively. Question Type SDrehtoCL .taeF-ateMSD LArehtoCL .taeF-ateMLA ytilitU epyTetamitsE Contributions p >τ obs. ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ p Van den Bosch (2004); Jamieson and Talwalkar (2016); ref Petrak(2000);ZengandLuo(2017) p >τ both ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ p Lietal(2017) ref π a∈A obs. ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ p LeiteandBrazdil(2005,2007);vanRijnetal(2015) π a∈A obs. ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ p LeiteandBrazdil(2008,2010) π a∈A