of approaches that fall within this framework. This framework categorises the existing literature along the following three axes: 1. The type of decision-making situation, i.e., whether it is used to make decisions about data acquisition, early stopping, or early discarding. See Sec. 4.1 for more details. 2. The type of technical question that can be answered with an approach, e.g., some approaches can only answer the binary question whether a model has converged, whereas other approaches are able to answer questions about the behaviour of any part of the learning curve. See Sec. 4.2 for more details. 3. The data resources that are used to model the learning curve. For example, in some cases, data from different algorithms on the same dataset is being used, whereas in other cases, data from the same algorithm on other datasets. See Sec. 4.3 for more details. We perform an extensive literature survey in which we categorise published learning curve extrapolation models along the various axes of this framework. ThisliteraturesurveyissubjectofSec.5,whichisthensummarisedinTable1. Wefocusspecificallyonsupervisedmachinelearning,inwhichlearningcurves describe the predictive performance of a model produced by a learning algorithmeitherasafunctionofthenumberoftraininginstancesorofthetimeor iterationsspentforlearningonagivendataset.Weexplicitlyexcludelearning Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 4 Learning Curves for Decision Making curves that describe the performance of a learning agent in an environment over time, i.e., the learning curve of an agent in a reinforcement learning setup (Waltz and Fu, 1965). Similarly, we briefly contrast learning curves to other performance curves, such as active learning curves, feature curves, and capacity curves, and explain why we consider these out of scope for the literaturereview.Still,weaimtosurveyexhaustivelytheliteraturethatintroduces approaches that use learning curves in supervised learning. Contributions: Our contributions are the following. • We present a unified framework of the usage of learning curves for decision making in machine learning and an extensive review of the literature on approaches that fall within this framework. This framework contains three axes, i.e., (i) the type of decision-making situation, see also Fig. 1 (ii) the type of question that can be answered, see also Fig. 10 and (iii) the data resources that are used to model the learning curve, see also Fig. 11. While the first axis of this framework is also used in other literature (see, e.g., Viering and Loog, 2023), to the best of our knowledge, the other two axes have not yet been explicitly identified. • Weconducted a literaturesurveyin which we categorise methodspresented in the literature along the various axes of this framework. Sec. 5 lists all these methods (where each subsection represents a type of question being answered), and Table 1 overviews all methods along the three axes of our framework. • Basedontheframework,weidentifyunexploredroutesforfurtherresearch. Most notably, we note that there is a mismatch between the research questions being answered and the learning curve modelling method being used; in many cases, a high-level modelling technique is used to answer a lowlevel question. We speculate that matching the level of the question being answered with the appropriate level of the modelling technique can further improve the obtained results. Relation to other literature reviews on learning curves: Another prominent literature review that centres around learning curves is the highly complementary work by Viering and Loog (2023), which has been developed in parallel. While both works have identified the three types of decision-making situations that are referred to in the literature, Viering and Loog (2023) survey more theoretical work that analyses the shape of learning curves,whereasthisworksurveysworkthatismoreorientedtowardsmethods that extrapolate learning curves, thereby supporting the data scientists in various decision-making situations. Structure: This paper is structured into three main parts. Sec. 2 presents relevant background knowledge on learning curves, including formal definitions and the Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 5 terminologyrelevantfortheremainder.Sec.3presentsrelevantimportantconceptsthatrelatetohowlearningcurvesaregenerallymodelled.Sec.4contains ourmain contribution byintroducing ourframeworkfor categorisingmethods thatutiliselearningcurvesfordecisionmakinginsupervisedlearning.Following this framework, Sec. 5 exhaustively reviews approaches that explicitly or implicitly answer questions related to learning curves to make or recommend decisions in the context of supervised machine learning. Sec. 6 concludes our findings.Finally,AppendixApresentsatablethatoverviewsthemostcritical notation used throughout this paper. 2 Background on Learning Curves Thissectiongivesaconceptualbackgroundonlearningcurves.Itfirstprovides an idealised formal definition in Sec. 2.1 followed by a definition of empirical learning curves in Sec. 2.2 that can be computed in practice. The concept of utility curvesisintroducedinSec.2.3.Sec.2.4introducesimportantterminologysuchasanchorpoints,limitperformance,andthesaturationpoint.Finally, Sec. 2.5 contrasts the learning curves covered in this survey with other types of performance curves used in machine learning. 2.1 Sample-Wise and Iteration-Wise Learning Curves We consider learning curves in the context of supervised machine learning. Formally, in the supervised learning context, we assume some instance space and a label space . A dataset d (x,y) x ,y is a finite X Y ⊂ { | ∈ X ∈ Y} relation between the instance space and the label space. We denote as the D set of all possible datasets. A learning algorithm is a function a : Ω H, D× → where H = h h : is the space of hypotheses and Ω