association with a particular size of a sampled training data set or a number of visited instances that is used in the context of building an empirical learning curve. Throughout this paper, we formally use the symbol b to refer to an anchor.Thereby,weabstractawayfromsamplesizesn oriterationt.Inother words, the symbol b is used to indicate points on both sample-wise curves or iteration-wise curves, and it should be clear from the context which one is meant (if the difference is relevant). For example, in Fig. 3 above, we have the following anchors. For the sample-wise curve, a geometric schedule with n 2i/2 i N is cho- ∈ {⌈ ⌉ | ∈ } sen. In this concrete case, the anchors are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, 23, 32, { 46, 64, 91, 128, 182, 256, 363, 512, 725, 1024, 1449, 2048, 2897, 3750 . In the } iteration-wise curve, every iteration is used as an anchor, so t 1,..,200 . ∈{ } Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 11 0.28 0.26 0.24 0.22 0.20 0.18 trainsetsize d ornumberofiterationst | tr| etaRrorrE LearningCurve( ) C ObservationsofanEmpiricalLCatanchors LimitPerformance SaturationPoint/Performance(b /p ) sat sat Pre-ExponentialPoint/Performance Fig. 5: Concepts related to a learning curve. Red: Limit performance. Green: Saturation point b (vertical line) and saturation performance p (horisat sat zontal line). Orange: Pre-exponential point (vertical line) and pre-exponential performance(horizontalline).Thecurveplateausataperformanceof0.2;the plateau is not visualized here to emphasise the difference between the preexponential point and saturation point. Limit Performance It is generally assumed that learning curves converge to some value. In the case of iterative learning curves, there are sometimes oscillations in the curve, but even in such cases, the curve usually converges to some (in those cases, typically a bad) value eventually. We are not aware of a particular term that is used to describe the score to which a learner converges. Cortes et al (1994) describesthelimiting performance ortheasymptotic performance ofthedata; i.e.,itisnotthepropertyofaparticularlearnerbutthebestachievableperformance among all learners under consideration (even though only tested with two model types in the paper). In this paper, we adopt the term limit performance of the learner (on a fixed number of training instances in the case of iteration-wise curves), and we denote this performance as p . lim Saturation Point Intuitively, the saturation point is the anchor after which the performance convergences.Thatis,theanchorafterwhichallvaluesareinadistanceofless thansomepre-definedandtypicallyverysmallε.Inearlyworks,thispointhas beencalledstopping point (Figueroaetal,2012;LeiteandBrazdil,2003,2004; Meek et al, 2002; Provost et al, 1999). Provost et al (1999) characterise this pointasfollow:“Modelsbuiltwithsmallertrainingsets[thans ]havelower min accuracy than models built with from training sets of size s , and models min built with larger training sets have no higher accuracy.” In the context of thoseworks,namelyprogressivesampling,thetermstoppingpointmakessense becausetheyprogressivelysampleuntiltheyreachtheconvergenceregion,and then stop the sampling procedure. In the absence of such a mechanism, the term appears a bit odd. The notion of saturation in the context of learning Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 12 Learning Curves for Decision Making curveswasproposedbyTomanek(2010)andseemsappropriatesincethelimit performance has not been reached, but it has almost been reached. The curve is saturated up to a mistake of ε. We will denote the saturation point itself as b , emphasising that the sat saturation point is an anchor. The saturation performance is simply the value of the learning curve at that point. Both are defined in the context of a fixed learnera.Hence,wecanwritethesaturationperformanceasp := (a,b ) sat sat C in the context of a sample-wise curve or p := (a,n,b ) in the context of sat sat C an iteration-wise curve. Pre-Exponential Point A related concept is the pre-exponential point and, correspondingly, the preexponential performance. The saturation point may be expensive to reach in the sense that a lot of training data is necessary to obtain the saturation performance. We call the smallest anchor point for which an increase by a factor of q leads to a performance improvement of less than some δ, i.e., (a,n) (a,q n) < δ. Reasonable candidates for q can be 2 or 10, while C −C · candidates for δ can be 0.01 or 0.001 if the metric is the error rate. Its semantic is that from the pre-exponential point on, one needs more than qk (i.e., an exponentially increasing number of) training samples or iterations to improve by a low margin of kδ. Correspondingly, the pre-exponential performance is the performance that can be obtained by a comparably small anchor point. Utility-Based Stopping Point The utility-based stopping point is the point at which the acquisition of further data points has a negative impact on the utility of the data analysing entity. Therefore, this concept is associated with utility curves. The utilitybasedstoppingpointisnotrelatedtothesaturationpointbut,ifatall,rather to the pre-exponential point; we denote it as bu . In Fig. 4, this is the peak of sat the yellow curve. Plateau The right-sided open interval bounded by the saturation point from the left is consistently called the plateau of the curve. However, a curve can also have