Sec. 3.2). In the most general form, we can ask for a full belief model of the learning curves, specifying a probability distribution over the values of at one point or a set thereof (Domhan et al, 2015; Klein C et al, 2017a,b; Swersky et al, 2014) (cf. Sec. 3.3). It is common practice to solve relatively simple questions by implicitly answering more complex ones. For example, a typical question in the context of model selection is whether the performance of a candidate learner at some given data or in the limit will beat a known baseline (Domhan et al, 2015; Leite and Brazdil, 2005; van Rijn et al, 2015). This is the binary question of p p , where p is the best-known performance. Often, this question is ref ∗ ∗ ≤ answered by estimating p (maybe p ) explicitly and then comparing it to ref lim p (Leite and Brazdil, 2005; van Rijn et al, 2015), which is an answer to a ∗ slightlymorecomplicatedquestion.Domhanetal(2015);Swerskyetal(2014) built an explicit curve model, for estimating p and p , respectively. The lim ref approach answers this binary question by building an entire learning curve modelandthenderivesthebinaryanswerfromit.Therationalebehindthisis the notion that one often needs rather complex models to find a high-quality answer to a simple question, and it is just a side effect that one can then even answer other questions with those models. 4.3 Used Data Resources for Inference Abovewehavediscussedaseriesofquestionsthatcanbeaskedaboutlearning curve properties, which in turn are important for decision making in a specificcontext.Ofcourse,answeringthesequestionsrequiresspecificinformative resources.Inaconcretedecision-makingsituation,wearetypicallyconfronted with a dataset and a learner or a portfolio of learners. We call this the target dataset and the current learner. That is, we want to say something about the learningcurveofthecurrentlearnerinadomaininwhichwehaveafinite(the target) dataset d available. Fig. 11 shows the types of data resources that can be used to answer questions about learning curves. We can utilise empirical learning curves gathered on the target dataset, empirical learning curves gathered on other datasets, dataset meta-features, and features describing the learners. Learning curves gatheredonthetargetdatasetcomeataparticularcomputationalcost,asthey needtobegeneratedduringtheprocess.Typically,whenmodellingthecurrent learneronthetargetdataset,apartial empiricallearningcurveisconstructed, Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 31 Data Resources Dataset Target Other Learner MetaDataset Datasets Features Features Curveson Curveson Curveson Curveson Current Other Other Current Learner Learners Learners Learner Fig. 11: Taxonomy of data resources for learning curve analysis whichcanthenbestep-wiseextendedordiscarded(Domhanetal,2015;Leite and Brazdil, 2003; Provost et al, 1999). When using learning curves of other datasets, those are usually available up to a large portion of the dataset size (with a specific schedule of anchors) in the case of sample-wise curves or until convergence in the case of iteration-wise curves. This is because these curves couldbepreparedofflinebeforethetargetdatasetbecameavailable(Leiteand Brazdil, 2003, 2010; van Rijn et al, 2015). Both learning curves of the current learner and other learners can be utilised for this. In the context of model selection,variouslearnersareusuallyevaluated.Thereforewecanacquirevarious learning curves of other learners on the target dataset (Baker et al, 2018; Chandrashekaran and Lane, 2017; Klein et al, 2017a,b; Swersky et al, 2014). Other types of data resources that can be used are meta-features on the datasets and learner features. These are measurable qualities of the dataset and learner, respectively, and these can indicate how similar specific datasets (or learners) are. These give the decision-making algorithm a sense of which learning curves are more informative for the current learner and target dataset. To the best of our knowledge, the only line of research utilising meta-features for learning curve modelling is the work of Leite and Brazdil (2008, 2010); Ruhkopf et al (2023). The description of learners through features for the sake of model prediction is specifically prevalent in the analysis of iteration-wise curves (Baker et al, 2018; Klein et al, 2017b; Swersky et al, 2014). The development and analysis of meta-features is a research field in its own right; for more information, we refer the reader to Brazdil et al (2022). Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 32 Learning Curves for Decision Making 5 Literature Review on learning curve extrapolation methods This section presents the literature review that covers methods to model and utiliselearningcurves.Weorganiseapproachesbasedonthekeyproblemthey resolve on a rather abstract level and independent of the purpose or type of decision-making situation in which they were presented. We organise it along the framework presented in Fig. 10, particularly along the axis that reflects the technical question asked about a learning curve. The motivation to not use the type of decision-making situation, which is also a prominent property of these methods, is that the same approach can be used in different decisionmakingsituations.Forexample,LeiteandBrazdil(2004)presentandmotivate anapproachtoidentifytheportionofsomegivendatathatshouldbeusedfor training(i.e.,determinethesaturationpoint),butthesameapproachcouldbe used to determine how much more data would be needed to obtain saturation performance.Similarly,Domhanetal(2015)presentanapproachthataimsto decideduringtrainingwhetheraneuralnetworkwillbecomecompetitive(ask forsaturationperformance);however,theydidthisbymodellingthecomplete learning curves. Fig.12givesanoverviewofallthemethodscategorisedinthisframework. We make the following two observations. • Most learning curve methods address the early discarding / model selection decision-makingsituation.Thisimpliesthatthereisanopportunityformore research on, for example, data acquisition or early stopping. We note that researchtowardsactivelearningprovidesmanyapproachesthathandledata acquisition (which we do not cover),