al, 1992) and used to predict the predictive performance on the complete dataset (for two neural networkarchitecturesontheNISTdataset).Theauthorsfindthatthepredictive performance on 60k instances can be almost perfectly predicted using the inverse power law. Unfortunately, it is not entirely clear on which anchors the estimates are built. Notably, this is the only paper we are aware of that fits both a train- and test-error curve. The paper reports some information about noise through boxplots on the curve but does not explicitly incorporate them into the model. JohnandLangley(1996)proposedasimilarapproach.Similartothework of Cortes et al (1993), the model is used to estimate the performance of a learner on the complete dataset with the goal of stopping the training procedureearly.Onedifferenceisthatthemodelisadoptedforasample-wise curve insteadofaniteration-wise curve.Concerningconvergencedetection,Johnand Langley (1996) employ the Probably Close Enough criterion, which detects convergence if the probability that the accuracy of a model trained on the complete dataset will be at most some ε worse than the current model’s performance is less than some δ. However, the paper itself then does not adopt a notion of probabilities but stops if the performance on the complete dataset predicted by an inverse power law model is not by at least ε better than the currently observed performance; they call the approach Extrapolation of Learning Curves. In other words, the uncertainty is not quantified. The inverse power law has been used in many applications. For example, several approaches have used the inverse power law to model the performance ofneuralnetworksindifferentdomains(Alwosheeletal,2018;Choetal,2015). It is noteworthy that recent works show evidence against the usage of any commonly used models for neural networks, at least in the initial parts of the curve,duetothe(sample-wise)doubledescent(Nakkiranetal,2020).Atleast for certain combinations of architectures, datasets, and training procedures, there is empirical evidence that the learning curve exhibits non-monotonic behaviour,whichcontradictsallexistinglearningcurvemodelsliketheinverse power law model. Range Estimates Mukherjee et al (2003) built inverse power law models in the domain of DNA data.Themaincontributionofthatpaperistoanalysetheappropriatenessof theinversepowermodeloneightmedicaldatasets.Tothisend,theyconstruct uncertainty bounds around the mean learning curve consisting of the q25 and q75 curves fitted from those statistics, respectively. This way, a learning curve model including information about dispersion is obtained. Experiments are Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 48 Learning Curves for Decision Making conductedforasupportvectormachineoneightmedicaldatasetsinwhichthe leave-one-out validation result (estimate of the learning curve on d 1 data | |− points for training) is compared to the boundaries suggested by the model. Having an explicit model for the q25 and q75 curves, one can obtain for an arbitrary anchor b not only a point estimate of µ but an estimate of the a,b inter-quartile range of f(a,b) itself, which is arguably more informative given that, assuming Gaussian noise, the interval should also contain µ . a,b Figueroa et al (2012) modify the aforementioned approach in two ways. First, different anchors are associated with different weights, usually to assign higher weights to larger anchors since they are more informative. Second, implicitlyassumingastandardGaussiandistributionoftheobservationsasin Eq. (5), they compute a 95% confidence interval to describe the uncertainty rather than the interquartile range. Based on this information, for a query pointb,theypredictaconfidenceintervalinsteadofapointestimate.Figueroa etal(2012)alsoappliedthisapproachtomedicaldata,justasMaoetal(2016) for EEG data. More recently, it was also successfully used for sensor communication (Oyedare and Park, 2019). This work aims to predict a reasonable sample size, which is perhaps more reasonably addressed by the utility-based approaches discussed in Sec. 5.1.5. Recently, Koshute et al (2021) have used the inverse power law to predict the minimum anchor point on which a learner must be trained to reach nearp performancewithagivendesired confidence.Thisapproachcanbeseenas sat a combination of the above two approaches. Similar to Figueroa et al (2012), they compute the confidence interval at all anchors. However, instead of using thesetoestimateconfidenceintervalsatarbitrarypoints,theyfitasinglecurve on the lower bounds of the confidence intervals at the known anchors. The resulting model is not used to make predictions on arbitrary anchors but to compute the cheapest anchor that will obtain with a pre-defined probability (size of confidence-interval) a performance that is ε-close to p , where ε is a sat hyperparameter controlled by the user. Theideaofcomputingconfidenceintervalsisalsoadoptedbylearningcurve cross-validation (Mohr and van Rijn, 2021, 2023). A Morgan-Mercer-Flodin model is created to decide whether or not to skip intermediate anchors and evaluate the learner on the full dataset size. However, the confidence intervals are used differently than in the above cases and are not used for the inverse powerlawmodelitself.Incontrast,theconfidenceboundsareusedtocompute the range of possible slopes of the learning curve between two anchors. Distribution Estimates The first approach to predict distribution estimates for any anchor point was presented by Domhan et al (2015). The approach assumes learning curves to be instances of a parametric model that is a linear combination of known model classes, such as the inverse power law, and others (Gu et al, 2001). Themaindifferencetotheaboveapproachesisthat,insteadofestimatingthe parameters through a maximum likelihood approach, they estimate, for each Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 49 parameter, the whole posterior distribution adopting Monte-Carlo Markov Chains (MCMC). The approach is successfully used to