2. Potential. What is the best possible predictive performance given unlimited training observations? 3. Maximization Principle.Byhowmuchcanthepredictiveperformancebe improvedifthereisabudgetforafixednumberofadditionaldatapoints? 4. Minimization Principle. How many instances are necessary to obtain a certain degree of predictive performance? 5. Utility maximization. Which sample size maximises a given utility function? In the context of data acquisition, we typically deal with sample-wise curves. Furthermore,oneisoftennotcommittedtoaparticularlearner;therefore,the performance measure in the above questions is implicitly the best one of a portfolio of learners. That is, one assumes a set of learners that is considered admissibleforthepredictiontaskduetoexternalrestrictions.Ingeneral,dueto the ability to parameterise learners, this set is usually infinite. When referring totheportfolio’sperformanceataspecificanchorpoint,weareinterestedinits best-performing algorithm at that specific point at the learning curve (Mohr and van Rijn, 2023). Of course, if one is committed to one particular learner, then the situation simplifies to a portfolio of size 1. Since data acquisition is not for free, it is sensible to relate potential predictive performance improvements with the costs to collect the additional labels. Therefore, instead of looking only at predictive performance, one looks at utility of an anchor point. While performance typically only improves with an increased number of observations, the utility also considers acquisition costs, which negatively affect the utility. Therefore, the goal is to decide how many instances should be labelled to maximise utility, i.e., how many additional instances are justified before the added value no longer outweighs the additional costs (Last, 2007; Weiss and Tian, 2008). Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 24 Learning Curves for Decision Making 4.1.2 Early Stopping Earlystoppingmeansinterruptingthetrainingprocessofalearnerifthelearning curve has converged. The term ‘early’ refers to the fact that the learning process would normally be continued, e.g., because more data is available or other stopping criteria are not yet satisfied. That is, one uses the learning curve to judge that, despite more available resources or other criteria that would encourage further training, investing more time will not improve the performance of the considered model class any further. The training process canthenbestoppedearly,i.e.,earlierthanifthatcriterionwouldnotbeused. Fig. 9 shows this logic in the left (red) part in which the blue learning curve of learner a is used to detect that not all the data is necessary and only 500 training instances are used (to save training time). Early stopping can be applied to both sample-wise curves and iteration-wise curves. Early stopping in sample-wise curves means retraining a model on different training set sizes to create an empirical learning curve with training set size as the budget. This can make sense if we do not already know that the saturation point is larger than the available dataset size; otherwise we should immediately train on the complete dataset. We can then try to analyse the sample-wise curve of the learner for increasing training sizes and stop as soon as we find that performances do not change significantly between two anchors (John and Langley, 1996; Provost et al, 1999). For iterative learners (such as neural networks), an iteration-wise curve is usually a by-product that can cheaply be created in parallel to learning. Hence it might seem more appropriate to do early stopping based on an iteration-wise curve rather than the sample-wise curve. An additional advantage of early stopping in iteration-wise curves is that it can help avoid over-fitting, e.g., in neural networks (Bishop, 1995; Goodfellow et al, 2016) or gradient boosting. While it is conceivable that building sample-wise curves, even for iterative learners, could be useful in some cases, we are not aware of any such work being done for early stopping (or any other purpose). The early stopping problem can be addressed retrospectively and projectively. Retrospective early stopping means to stop after observing the saturation point. Projective early stopping means to predict the saturation point before it is reached and stop precisely at the (believed) saturation point. The projective approach is particularly important in the case of sample-wise curves. Earlystoppinginsample-wise curvesanddataacquisitionmightseemsimilar since both define a sample size at which a process should be stopped. However, the concepts are fundamentally different in three ways: 1. Stopped Process: Early stopping means to stop a training process (at the saturation point) run in a machine. In contrast, the decision-making situation in data acquisition is to stop the data acquisition process (at the economic saturation point). The latter is sometimes carried out by humans. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 25 Early Stopping vs. Stopping in Data Acquisition 0.30 µ MatterofEarlyStopping a, · µ MatterofDataAcqusition 0.25 (argmina∈Aµa,∞ , · ) 0.20 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 EarlyStopping avaiabledata DataAcquisition stopshere stopshere Fig. 9: Early stopping with sample-wise curves stops the training process of asinglelearnera atitssaturationpointusingits(actuallyempirical)learning curve.Itshowsthelearningcurveoftwolearners,thebluecurveandthegreen dashed curve. The latter has the best saturation performance. The available datamarksarestrictiontothisprocess.Incontrast,dataacquisitionconsiders the available data as the decision variable, and it stops collecting data when all learners have reached their saturation performance. 2. RoleofAvailableData: Inearlystopping,theavailableamountoftraining data is a