curves used in machine learning. 2.1 Sample-Wise and Iteration-Wise Learning Curves We consider learning curves in the context of supervised machine learning. Formally, in the supervised learning context, we assume some instance space and a label space . A dataset d (x,y) x ,y is a finite X Y ⊂ { | ∈ X ∈ Y} relation between the instance space and the label space. We denote as the D set of all possible datasets. A learning algorithm is a function a : Ω H, D× → where H = h h : is the space of hypotheses and Ω is a source of { | X → Y} randomness. Notethatlearningcurvescanalsobeconsideredinothermachinelearning setups.Infact,learningcurvesappearedfirstinreinforcementlearning(Waltz and Fu, 1965) and have also been used for unsupervised learning (Meek et al, 2002). However, to give this survey focus, we consider learning curves for supervised learning. The performance of a hypothesis is typically expressed as risk, which is also often called out-of-sample error: (cid:90) (h)= loss(y,h(x))dP . (1) out R X×Y , X Y Here, loss(y,h(x)) R is the penalty for predicting h(x) for instance x when the true labe ∈ l is y , and P is a joint probability measure ∈ o X n ∈ Y X×Y from which the available dataset d has been generated. As such, the X ×Y out-of-sample error represents the weighted summed error that hypothesis h makes on all possible instance-label pairs, weighted by their probabilities. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 6 Learning Curves for Decision Making The performance of a learning algorithm is simply the performance of the hypothesis it produces. In contrast to the performance of a hypothesis, the performance of a learner depends on its input, i.e., on the data provided for learning. The average performance of learner a for a number n of training examples can then be expressed as (cid:90) (a,n)= (a(d ,ω))dP dP , (2) out tr Ω C R X×Y ω ∈ Ω,dtr∈D , | dtr| =n where d is the dataset of size n used to induce a model using learner a. tr It is gener ∈ all D y assumed that d is a collection of i.i.d. samples from P . X×Y When we consider Eq. (2) as a function of the number of training samples for a fixed learner a, we obtain the sample-wise curve of learner a. That is, the sample-wise curve is the function (a, ) : N R; so it is a sequence of C · → performances, one for each training size. Fig. 2 (left) visualises this by means of the green line and compares this to two other types of learning curves with the error rate as the loss (see Sec. 2.5). Alternatively, many learning algorithms implement an iterative internal optimisation process, which allows describing the learning progress over time or a number of iterations. For example, neural network training produces a new hypothesis after every batch or epoch, ensemble learners like bagging or boosting produce a new hypothesis after every added ensemble member, and support vector machine optimizers yield updated attribute or instance coeffients in iteration. In the formal framework, a learner can be seen more generally as a function a : Ω H+ that maps a dataset to a sequence of D× → hypotheses,oneforeachofitsiterations.Theaboveerrorfunctionforlearners can then be written as (cid:90) (a,n,t)= (a(d ,ω) )dP dP , (3) out tr t Ω C R X×Y ω ∈ Ω,dtr∈D , | dtr| =n Here, t expresses some budget, for example, time or a number of iterations over the dataset, often expressed in epochs. Basedonthisnotion,theiteration-wise curveofalearnera isdefinedfora fixed dataset size n (often between 70% and 90% of the available data) and is thenthefunction (a,n, ):N R.Fig.2(right)visualisesanexampleoftwo C · → iteration-wise curves. It can be seen that these iteration-wise curves are also influenced by the number of samples. The sample-wise curve in this example (visualised by the dashed line) is assumed to utilise the maximal number of iterations. Examples of such learning curves occur above all in the analysis of deep learning models (Domhan et al, 2015; Goodfellow et al, 2016). The two types of learning curves seem to be related and indeed look similarwhenvisualised,buttheyhavedifferentsemantics.Thecrucialdifferenceis that iteration-wise curves are usually visualized for a fixed and finite number of training samples (expressed by n), no matter how large t becomes. In fact, Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 7 sample size etar rorre iterations/time etar rorre Sample-Wise Learning Curve Iteration-Wise Learning Curve num features etar rorre Feature Curve model capacity etar rorre Utility Curve Capacity Curve stream curve sampleoptimized curve sample size budget etar rorre iterations/time etar rorre Sample-Wise Learning Curve Iteration-Wise Learning Curve num features etar rorre Feature Curve model capacity etar rorre Utility Curve Capacity Curve stream curve sampleoptimized curve budget Fig. 2: Left: (Standard) sample-wise curve (green) for a single