established again. Note that while the workisbasedonthefindingsbyWeissandProvost(2003)(cf.Sec.2.5.2),they apply a different strategy. Instead of optimising over the class distribution for agivenanchorsize,theytrytofindthestoppingpointunderthepremisethat the training set will always be balanced. Regardingthestoppingpointofiteration-wise curves,acommontechnique is to separate some data that is not used for training but to compute an iteration-wise curve online to detect convergence (Bishop, 1995). Projective Approaches A different idea to obtain the saturation point b was proposed by Leite and sat Brazdil (2003, 2004) through the notion of metalearning (Brazdil et al, 2022). SimilartoProvostetal(1999),ageometricscheduleisused.Theassumptionis thatwealreadyknowtheperformancesofthecurrentlearneratallanchorsin the schedule on other datasets. The idea is to compute, on the target dataset, theperformancesonlyfortheveryfirstanchorsandthentopredict thesaturation point by aggregating the (known) saturation point on the k most similar learning curves of the other datasets. The distance measure here is the sum of differences between the curves at the initial anchors; the concrete anchors used in their paper are (91, 128, 181, 256, ...), corresponding to the powers of √2. The authors consider different aggregation measures such as mean and minimum(LeiteandBrazdil,2003)andthemedian(LeiteandBrazdil,2004). The authors discuss the potential issue that, among the k nearest neighbour curves, some or even all of the curves can be substantially different from the partial learning curve on the target dataset. Using the k nearest learning curves to predict the stopping point would not work in such cases. Follow-up work (Leite and Brazdil, 2007) proposes a remedy to this problem, in which the curves are not used directly but are adjusted via a concept called curve adaptation (discussed in Sec. 5.1.6). 5.1.5 Finding the Utility-Based Stopping Point The problem of identifying the utility-based stopping point was, to our knowledge, first addressed by Meek et al (2002) and was also independently investigated by Weiss and Tian (2006). In these papers, a retrospective approach is applied. The idea is similar to the aforementioned concept of progressive sampling (Provost et al, 1999), except that the analysis is done for utilityratherthanlearningcurves.Incontrasttothelearningcurve,theutility curve does not plateau but starts to deteriorate after its peak (see Fig. 4). The main difficulty with the concept of utility in the context of learning curvesistofindaunifyingscalefor(i)thecostsofdataacquisitionandtraining time and (ii) the model performance. Meek et al (2002) avoid this problem by adoptingthenotionofimplicitutilitythroughthecomparisonwithabaseline. Theystopthealgorithmwhentheratiobetweenthebenefitimprovementand the augmented runtime drops below a pre-defined threshold. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 42 Learning Curves for Decision Making Incontrast,WeissandTian(2006)computeanexplicitutility,andthealgorithm stops as soon as the observed utility decreases for the first time, which istakenastheindicatorthattheutility-basedstoppingpointhasbeenpassed. Theauthorsadopttheconceptofthenetutilityofapotentialclassifier,which is the difference (in utility) between predictive performance (under a hypothetical number of training instances) and the cost to acquire the (additional) instances. Notably, the assumption is that the user has no control over the instances for which labels will be acquired next, which contrasts the approach from active learning. To merge different types of inconveniences (i.e., acquisition costs and prediction errors) into a single utility measure, the user has to define costs per unit, e.g., costs for acquiring a single usable training instance and costs for making a wrong prediction. Furthermore, the authors consider the problem of deciding online whether or not to acquire more data and, in the affirmative case, how many instances should be considered in the acquisition batch before reconsidering. The latter effectively corresponds to deciding uponaprogressivesamplingscheme(Provostetal,1999).However,thepaper doesnotanalysetheeffectsoffixedcostsperbatch(suchasthecomputational costs of training a model), which implies that one could set batch sizes to 1 without consequence. A consecutive version of that paper also adds the CPU cost for model inductiontothecostsofapointonthelearningcurve (WeissandTian,2008). The original paper only considered acquisition costs and the prediction error. Thismodelalsoseemssuitableforiteration-wise curves,wheretherewouldbe no data acquisition costs. Inalloftheaboveapproaches,theusageoftheempiricallygatheredlearningcurvesfordecisionmakingisminimal.Moreover,theapproachesignoreall except the last two points on the learning curve. In this sense, and in terms ofthestoppingpointapproaches,theaboveworksareretrospectiveinnature. No model of the learning curve is built, and no projections of errors on bigger training sizes are made, which, for example, could make sense to predict that thisutilitypeakeventwilloccurinthefutureorevenonlyinthenextiteration. Last (2007) proposes such an approach, which we discuss in Sec. 5.2.2. 5.1.6 Performance Prediction at Fixed Point The problem of predicting the learning curve value is naturally a regression problem, where the goal is to predict µ for a fixed budget b. Essentially, a,b given a fixed learner a and the budget expressed in either observations n or iterations t, it is about predicting (a,n) for sample-wise curves, and preC dicting (a,n,t) for sample-wise curves. The attributes are the performance C values at different (cheap) anchors and potentially additional contextualising attributes. Using these attributes, one explicitly or implicitly generalises over datasets orlearning algorithms (orboth).Modelsthatgeneraliseoverdatasets are typically called meta-models and rather aim at model ranking (Brazdil etal,2022;Ruhkopfetal,2023),whichwediscussinSec.5.1.2.Thisisbecause Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 43 it is difficult to generalise exact performance across datasets. When generalising over learners, one typically trains a single model for the target dataset, trained from learning curves on the same dataset belonging to other learning algorithms. Models that generalise over learners are typically called surrogate models (Eggensperger et al, 2018). We organise this section