stricttimeandmemoryconstraints(Bifetetal,2018).Incrementallearnerslike Hoeffdingtrees(DomingosandHulten,2000)andmodelsinducedbystochastic gradient descent are natural solutions to this problem domain. When applied toadatastream,thesealgorithmsexplicitlyforget aninstanceonceithasbeen processed. This is not only to free memory but also to address the problem of concept drift,i.e.,thefactthatP changesovertime.Insuchacase,wedo X×Y nothavethat (a,n)=lim (a,n,t)butratherthat (a,n)= (a,n,n), t C →∞C C C where the learner is updated at every incoming training instance, and each of the n instances was considered exactly once; for example, similar to training a neural network for one epoch with batch size 1. While this produces a kind of sample-wise curve, the result is clearly different from the learning curve received in the normal batch setting. Fig. 2 displays how these type of curves theoretically relate to the normal sample-wise curves. Even though syntactically equivalent to a sample-wise curve, data stream learning curves are substantially different and need different treatment. Due to the (potential) concept drift over the time dimension, the i.i.d. assumption isnotguaranteed(daCostaetal,2016).Fromatheoreticalviewpoint,extrapolating the learning curve over time to meaningfully predict future behaviour becomes impossible without the i.i.d. assumption. Due to its special nature, the data stream setting is beyond our scope. 2.5.4 Feature Curves Learning curves always consider a fixed number of features. Instead, one can fixthenumberoftraininginstancesandconsidertheperformanceasafunction of the number of features. This yields so-called feature curves (Hughes, 1968; Viering and Loog, 2023). Defining meaningful feature curves is conceptually more difficult than learning curves because of the importance that single features can have. For Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 15 simplicity,consideronlysample-wise curvesforthiscomparison.Insuchlearning curves, every point n is associated with the expected performance when usingn traininginstances.Thesen traininginstancesareassumedtobedrawn independently and identically distributed from the underlying distribution. Accordingtotheaforementioneddefinitionsofalearningcurve(perEq.2and Eq. 3), there is no notion of a more informative instance (even though this notion clearly exists in the field of active learning). In particular, the order in which instances are drawn is irrelevant. However, in the context of features, some features are often more informative than others (and again, other featuresthathavenotbeenmeasuredmaybeevenmoreinformative).Therefore, inordertogetanadequateoverview,featurecurvesrequiresomekindofaveraging over all possible sets of features of a fixed size that can be formed from a base set of (available) features, as done by Hughes (1968). The fact that some features might be more important than other features makes it hard to modelandextrapolatefeaturecurves,asthereisnoreasonablesetofassumptions to build these models on. Fig. 6 displays two theoretical examples of feature curves. When having a finite number of samples, the performance of these curves will, in the limit (when more features are added), deteriorate due to the curse of dimensionality. Of course, when having infinite samples, the performance of such feature curves will go to perfect performance. Note that feature curves and learning curves can be integrated. For example, Strang et al (2018) look at the combination of the number of instances and the number of features. Since the effect of the number of features and the number of instances on the overall performance is clearly not independent, considering both together is sensible. At the same time, due to the ambiguous semantics of feature curves already discussed above, using such combined curves is not necessarily straightforward for decision making, and we are not aware that the combined curve has been used for decision making so far. 2.5.5 Capacity Curves Cortes et al (1994) introduce a curve that plots the performance of a configurablelearnerasafunctionofthecomplexityofitsinstantiation.Forexample, the learner could be a neural network, and the complexity would then be the numberofhiddenlayers.Indoingthis,afixeddatasetsizeisassumed.Inthat paper,thistypeofcurvehasnospecificname,butwedubitthecapacitycurve because they plot the performance as a function of capacity. Fig. 7 displays examples of capacity curves. Capacity curves are interesting from a theoretical viewpoint as they allow ustoanalysetheintrinsicnoiselevelofthegivendata.Moreprecisely,onecan ask for the performance of a learner of some complexity level on, perhaps, an infinite number of data points. If this value can be computed for every complexity level, then we obtain a performance curve over the model complexity. If the number of data points is large enough, this curve can be assumed to be monotonically decreasing. If we have a maximally flexible learner (such as a neural network) that can, in principle, assimilate any function, then the curve Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 16 Learning Curves for Decision Making sample size etar rorre iterations/time etar rorre Sample-Wise Learning Curve Iteration-Wise Learning Curve num features etar rorre Feature Curve model capacity etar rorre Utility Curve Capacity Curve stream curve sampleoptimized curve budget Fig. 7: Capacity curve example for a learner class whose complexity can be increased (e.g., a neural network), once for a fixed and finite dataset size and once for the theoretical case of an infinite dataset size. will converge towards the intrinsic noise of the data. That is, no learner can improve over that performance. 2.5.6 Curriculum Learning Curriculumlearningisaparadigminspiredbyhumanlearningstrategies,particularlyhowhumanslearncomplextasksbygraduallyincreasingthedifficulty of the examples they are exposed to (Wang et al, 2022). Incurriculumlearning,insteadofrandomlypresentingtraininginstancesto themodel,instancesarepresentedinameaningfulorder,typicallyfromsimpler tomorecomplexsetsoftraininginstances.Thiscanhelpthemodellearnmore effectivelyandconvergefasterbyinitiallyfocusingoneasierinstancesthatare simpler to learn and gradually introducing more difficult instances. Learningcurvesrelatedtocurriculumlearningcomewithallsortsofnovel challenges, such as interpreting the learning curve in case more