their meta-features. More precisely, they compute the Manhattan distance between seven range-normalised dataset meta-features, e.g., dataset size, number of symbolic and numerical attributes, etc. The overall distance between the datasets is then the sum of the distance between the partial learning curves and the distance in terms of meta-features.ThisworkwasmarginallyrefinedintheSelectionofAlgorithms using Metalearning approach(SAM),whichappliesthesamelogicbutassigns a weight to each of the two distance sources (Leite and Brazdil, 2010); the weight is however implicitly assumed to be set to 0.5. ArecentandentirelydifferentapproachtocandidaterankingistheMASIF transformer framework (Ruhkopf et al, 2023). This approach takes partial learningcurvesofdifferentlearnersonthecurrenttask,whichmayhavepotentiallydifferentlengthsandcombinesthemwithdatasetmeta-featuresinorder to predict latent utility values of each learner as expected for the complete dataset. The transformer is trained based on previous experiences on datasets for which true rankings among the learners have been computed for the complete dataset. It is unclear to which degree the utility values predicted by the transformer resemble the actual performance of the learners at the target Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 38 Learning Curves for Decision Making size, but the paper suggests that the ordering π (a,b ) of the learna A ref ∈ ∼C ers according to these scores is relatively faithful to the true ordering induced by the actual performances. 5.1.3 Identification of Saturation Performance Estimating the limit or saturation performance p is helpful in two decisionsat making situations: 1. for sample-wise curves, it can be used for data acquisition by checking whether the availability of more data promises to improve predictive performance significantly. 2. for iteration-wise curves, it can be used for early discarding. Given a threshold p, we can determine whether training a model to convergence will achieve a generalisation performance of at least p. To the best of our knowledge, the question on estimates of p is the only sat of the above questions that received a substantial amount of theoretical contributions. This is not surprising since p is an asymptotic quantity that sat is arguably suited for theoretical analysis. The root of this line of research is the statistical mechanics framework (Seung et al, 1992). This and related research (Amari and Murata, 1993; Fine and Mukherjee, 1999; Murata et al, 1992) consider a type of capacity curve in which asymptotic properties of the learning curve are expressed in terms of the number of parameters, usually those of a neural network. However, a side observation of these works is that there is a kind of symmetrical behaviour between the train error and the validation error (sometimes called generalisation error). Cortes et al (1994) take these observations to use the mean of the two empirical curves to estimate p as soon as the training error starts to rise, sat i.e., as soon as the model cannot accommodate the training data perfectly anymore.Althoughthisworkconsiderscapacitycurvestoidentifytheintrinsic noiselevelofthedata,i.e.,theminimumerrornecessarilymadebyany learner, they also report the asymptotic performance of a neural network on a single data set. To the best of our knowledge, this is the only approach that estimates p without building an explicit learning curve model. While several other sat methods are capable of estimating p of iteration-wise curves of neural netsat works (Domhan et al, 2015; Swersky et al, 2014), these rely on full learning curve models, which are therefore discussed in Sec. 5.2.1. 5.1.4 Identification of Saturation Point Identifying the saturation point b of sample-wise curves is useful in the sat following cases: 1. Early-Stopping with sample-wise curves: Which portion of the available data is necessary to obtain saturation performance? This is relevant if d >b or the relationship between d and b is sat sat | | | | unknown and training on full d is potentially undesirable. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 39 2. Early-Stopping with iteration-wise curves: How many iterations are necessary until performance converges? This applies to incremental learners, such as neural networks. 3. Data acquisition: How many additional labelled observations are necessarytoobtain(near-optimal)performance?Thisappliesif d <b .The sat | | question can be posed for a specific learner or a portfolio. Retrospective Approaches The simplest way of determining the saturation point b is to incrementally sat build a learning curve and stop as soon as it is believed that the saturation point has been exceeded. If we do this, we can estimate that the saturation pointliesbetweenthelasttwoanchors.Foriteration-wise curves,determining b comes for free as a side-product of the training procedure. It is comsat monly used for training neural networks (Bishop, 1995; Goodfellow et al, 2016). On the other hand, it requires restarting and is potentially costly for sample-wise curves. JohnandLangley(1996)defineadynamicsampling approachtodetermine theb forsample-wise curves.Astraightforwardapproachmentionedinthat sat paper is to observe whether the performance has become worse on the last sampledanchor.Ifso,onemightconsidergatheringempiricalevidencethatthe saturation point has been exceeded, i.e., it should be somewhere between the lasttwoanchors.However,theauthorsarguethatpreliminaryresultsindicate thatthisapproachoftenstopstooearly.Thisismainlycausedbyhighaleatoric uncertainty,whichimpliesnoisyempiricallearningcurves.Ontheotherhand, one could argue that this approach stops far too late because it can require quitesomeiterationsuntil,bychance,theobservedperformanceisworsethan the one of the last iteration. Therefore, John and Langley (1996) propose