Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making in Supervised Machine Learning: A Survey Felix Mohr1* and Jan N. van Rijn2 1Universidad de La Sabana, Ch´ıa, Cundinamarca, Colombia. 2Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): felix.mohr@unisabana.edu.co; Contributing authors: j.n.van.rijn@liacs.leidenuniv.nl; Abstract Learningcurvesareaconceptfromsocialsciencesthathasbeenadopted in the context of machine learning to assess the performance of a learning algorithm with respect to a certain resource, e.g., the number of training examples or the number of training iterations. Learning curves have important applications in several machine learning contexts, most notablyindataacquisition,earlystoppingofmodeltraining,andmodel selection. For instance, learning curves can be used to model the performance of the combination of an algorithm and its hyperparameter configuration, providing insights into their potential suitability at an early stage and often expediting the algorithm selection process. Various learning curve models have been proposed to use learning curves for decision making. Some of these models answer the binary decision question of whether a given algorithm at a certain budget will outperformacertainreferenceperformance,whereasmorecomplexmodels predict the entire learning curve of an algorithm. We contribute a framework that categorises learning curve approaches using three criteria: the decision-making situation they address, the intrinsic learning curve question they answer and the type of resources they use. We surveypapersfromtheliteratureandclassifythemintothisframework. Keywords:learningcurves,supervisedmachinelearning 1 5202 naJ 82 ]GL.sc[ 2v05121.1022:viXra Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 2 Learning Curves for Decision Making 1 Introduction Learning curves describe a system’s performance on a task as a function of some resource to solve that task. There can be a pre-defined budget of that resource,limitingtheamountofresourcesthatcanbespent.Inothercases,the goal can be to obtain reasonable results while minimising the spent budget of thatresource.Typicaltypesofbudgetsarethenumberofexamples thelearner has observed before performing the task or the number of iterations or time thelearnerspendsinanenvironment.Theperformancemeasureexpressesthe quality of the obtained model, e.g., error rate or F1 measure. Learning curves are an important source of information for making decisions on the following matters in machine learning: • Data Acquisition determines how many data points should reasonably be acquired to obtain a desired performance. The top right plot in Fig. 1 visualisesascenariowherewehavealreadyobservedperformanceuptoacertain amountofdata(thebluelearningcurve).Wecanextrapolatethisandmake a prediction of what the performance would be if more data was available, i.e., the value of the orange extrapolation at different vertical pink lines in the figure (see, e.g., Last, 2009; Weiss and Tian, 2008). • Early Stopping of training a model. If we are committed to some specific learner (a learning algorithm and its hyperparameters), we might want to minimise the training time (John and Langley, 1996; Provost et al, 1999) or avoid over-fitting (Bishop, 1995; Goodfellow et al, 2016). The middle right plot in Fig. 1 visualises a scenario where we have already observed performanceuptoacertainamountofbudget,andbasedontheprogression of the learning curves on recent iterations, a decision can be made whether to continue the learning or terminate it. • Early Discarding in model selection. If we want to select from various models, we want to stop the evaluation of a candidate when we are reasonably certainthat itis notcompetitive tothe best-knownsolution (Domhanetal, 2015;MohrandvanRijn,2023;Swerskyetal,2014).Thebottomrightplot of Fig. 1 visualises a scenario where we have already observed performance up to a certain amount of budget (the blue learning curve) and already an incumbent performance obtained by an earlier configuration (horizontal dashed pink line). By using learning curve extrapolation techniques, we candeterminewhetherthecurrentconfigurationcansurpasstheincumbent configuration;if not,discarding thecurrenttraining process early(as in the case shown) would be justified. Many techniques with varying complexity and required resources have been proposed to address either of these problems. The complexity ranges from approachesthatsimplyrecognisewhetheranalreadyobservedpartofalearning curve has converged (Bishop, 1995; Provost et al, 1999) to the creation of parametric learning curve models, which capture a belief model for the behaviourofvariouslearnersatanypossiblebudget(Kleinetal,2017b).While simple approaches may only rely on the observations made so far for a learner Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 3 Fig. 1:Thethreetypesofdecision-makingsituationsinwhichlearningcurves aretypicallyused.Thex-axisofeachfigurerepresentsthebudgetintheapplicable unit, and the y-axis represents the performance. on the dataset of interest, more complex approaches may rely on additional resources such as learning curves or features of other datasets (see, e.g., Leite and Brazdil, 2010) or learners (see, e.g., Chandrashekaran and Lane, 2017) or both (see, e.g., Ruhkopf et al, 2023). Our contribution is a unified framework of the usage of learning curves for decision making in machine learning and an extensive review of the literature of approaches that fall within this framework. This framework categorises the existing literature along the following three axes: 1. The type of decision-making situation, i.e., whether it is used to make decisions about data acquisition, early stopping, or early discarding. See Sec. 4.1 for more details. 2. The type of technical question that can be answered with an approach, e.g., some approaches can only answer the binary question whether a model has converged, whereas other approaches are able to answer questions about the behaviour of any part of the learning curve. See Sec. 4.2 for more details. 3. The data