common patterns to define beliefs about µ are (i) point estimates (no uncertainty is expressed), (ii) range estimates, a,b e.g.,confidenceintervalsforµ ,or(iii)distributionestimates,whichquantify a,b a full belief model over the true value of µ . The aleatoric uncertainty can a,b also be quantified and modelled, e.g., by taking many different samples per anchor. Fig. 8 illustrates all of these concepts together. The blue line µ reprea, · sents the true learning curve as per Eq. 2 or Eq. 3 for all possible values of b. As this integrates out all possible data splits as well as random factors from the algorithm, each point is an average from a distribution of many possible performance values. The variance of this distribution is expressed as σ2 . a, This variance stems from the aleatoric uncertainty, in the sense that it is hig·h when the aleatoric uncertainty is high, and vice versa. As the budget b (representedonthex-axis)increases,thealeatoricuncertaintytypicallydecreases, and thereby the variance naturally decreases as well. The orange elements are related to observations of the learners’ performance and the learning curve model.Theorangepoints(whichalltogetherformO)showobservationsmade on the empirical learning curve (as a sample from the blue distributions, this canbeoneormoreperpoint).Notethatthesedonotnecessarilyneedtoalign with µ or fall within the variance bandwidth. The orange solid line shows a a, · point estimate defined by a parametric model obtained from the observations, andinthisexample,itsubstantiallydeviatesfromthetruecurve(cf.Sec.3.1). The orange shaded area is a range estimate modelling epistemic uncertainty, which grows as one moves away from the available data (cf. Sec. 3.2). Finally, the dashed orange lines are distribution estimates for different budgets b (cf. Sec.3.3).Eachofthesedashedlinescanbeseenasaprobabilitydensityfunction(rotated90degrees)foracertainbudgetb.Eachcurveshownsketchesthe distribution of the belief about where the true mean may be situated, in this figure modelled through Gaussian distributions. As we move away from the observations,theshapeofthesebellsgrowsbigger,indicatinghigherepistemic uncertainty. In the following sections, we will explain the three model types in more depth. We explain the concept for models of the type ˆf (b), i.e., models for a a specific learner a, because this is the most common case. Generalising a curve model across learners requires additional logic, which we discuss along with the models that utilise such generalised model in Sec. 5.2.3. 3.1 Point Estimates of the Learning Curve The simplest type of learning curve model for a learner a just estimates the mean curve values µ for any possible budget b and ignores uncertainty a,b aspects (solid orange line in Fig. 8). Given an empirical learning curve in the form of some finite samples from this process at different anchors B = Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 19 µ fˆ (PointEstimate) a, a · σ2 fˆ (RangeEstimate) a, a · Observations fˆ (DistributionEstimate) a Fig. 8: Visualisation of various forms of uncertainty in learning curve modelling. The blue line µ represents the true learning curve; the dot means a, · · that it is for all budgets b. The variance over all possible curves that could be sampled is expressed as σ2 . The variance stems from the aleatoric uncera, tainty. Orange points are anch·ors at which a learner’s performance has been observed. From this, an empirical learning curve can be modelled. The orange solid line, area, and dashed lines are point estimate, range estimate, and distribution estimate models, respectively. The latter two models also express epistemic uncertainty. b ,..,b , a regression model ˆf ( θ):N R is trained with respect to some 1 n a { } ·| → model class with parameters θ. A considerable number of different parametric modelshavebeenproposedovertimeforthistask.Toourknowledge,thefirst proposal of such classes was made, apparently independently, by Cortes et al (1993) and John and Langley (1996) with the three-parametric inverse power law (IPL) µ =α+βb γ, (6) a,b − wheretheparametersα,β,γ >0needtobeoptimisedtofitthelearningcurve for learner a. Frey and Fisher (1999) took a simplified variant of that model (αb β) and compared it to a logarithmic (αlogb +β), and an exponential − model(α 10 βb).Whileithasbeenargued,atleastforthepower-lawfamily, − · that there is a theoretical foundation for it (Seung et al, 1992), the considered model classes are typically not theoretically motivated but rather pop up in an ad-hoc manner. For example, Gu et al (2001) extended the above three classes,withoutaspecificmotivation,byavaporpressuremodel,theMorganMercer-Flodin (MMF) model, and a Weibull model. Depending on the purpose of the model, it is essential to distinguish between best-fitting and best-predictive models. As was pointed out by Gu et al (2001), the model class that can best accommodate a given set of anchor points is not always the one that will make the best predictions on a high anchor when having been fit only on some initial anchors. To understand the learningcurveofalearneronagivendataset,oneisinterestedinabest-fitting model class. For extrapolation, one is interested in a best-predictive one. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 20 Learning Curves for Decision Making Our work does not seek to give a broad overview of different model classes but rather about the usage of such models. We expose the inverse