that can be addressed by learning curves. There are various ways to address decision situations with learning curves; for example, questions about the saturation point of a given learner or whether a learner will perform better than another learner at a given amount of data. These questions can be further generalised, eventually ranging in complexity from binary questions to questions that address how any learner behaves at any budget. Wehavedoneanextensiveliteraturesurvey,categorisingalllearningcurve methods that we are aware of into this framework (Sec. 5). Table 1 shows an overviewofthemethodswehavediscussedinthissurvey,contextualisingthem according to these criteria. This table can be seen as an extension of Fig. 12. Based on this literature survey, we describe several directions for future work. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 54 Learning Curves for Decision Making More experimental databases for learning curve research to support the full complexity of learning curve methods. Doing relevant research on learning curves requires extensive computing power. Exploring a sample-wise curveinherentlyrequiresmanymodelstorestartthelearningprocess at different anchors, whereas exploring an iteration-wise curve is often doneonneuralnetworksthatcomewiththeirdistinctlayersofcomplexity(see, e.g., White et al, 2023). A common way to address this is by experimental databases or surrogate benchmarks that store certain experimental results. Thisallowsforfastexperimentationand,therefore,fasterdevelopmentcycles. While several of these experimental databases for learning curves exist (as outlined in Sec. 2.2), these currently do not capture the full scale of learning curves resources or questions that can be answered using learning curves. A quantitative benchmark on learning curve extrapolation methods.Manymodelshavebeenproposedtoextrapolatelearningcurvesandmake predictions about the performance of a learning at a higher budget (see, e.g., Guetal,2001).However,thesemodelshaveonlybeensubjecttolimitedcomparison. While Gu et al (2001) compared various parametric models against each other, and Kielh¨ofer et al (2024) compared a representative parametric model against a representative metalearning model across many different settings, more research is needed. Fig. 13 and Fig. 14 already show that, while manypapersareawareofothermethodsandcitethosemethods(greyarrows), only very few actively compare against each other (blue arrows). Moreover, manyoftheselearningcurvemodelsareusedasasmallcomponentinalarger system, e.g., an AutoML system. In such a case, the predictive performance of the learning curve model might not even be measured, as eventually, one often measures the quality of the complete system; in the case of an AutoML system, the performance of the final selected model. Due to this modular nature, improvements on the learning curve extrapolation method would then be orthogonal to improvements on the AutoML system. Tighter integration of learning curve extrapolation methods with AutoML systems. We already noted a clear opportunity for AutoML systems in Sec. 4.1.3. In situations where multiple learners are being compared against each other, the training set needs to be further split into an actual training set and a validation set to select the best learner to be tested on the test set (which can only be seen once). The existence of this validation set already shows an opportunity for learning curve methods; while a learner is being selected based on its performance after being trained on the split-off trainingset,whatisrelevantisitsperformanceafterbeingtrainedontheoriginal training set (i.e., the split-off training set plus validation set). It is not necessarily the case that the same learner performs best on both. Learning curve extrapolation models can predict which learner will eventually perform best on an anchor of the size of the original training set. Morelearningcurvemethodsthatoperateonlow-levelquestions. A prominent question that arises from the literature survey is whether simple questions can be treated more simplistically. Fig. 10 shows four binary Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 55 questions. While approaches aim to answer these questions, most do so by implicitly answering a more difficult question (see Table 1 and Fig. 12). Some ofthesequestionsarereallyatthecoreofthediscussedapproaches.Forexample, will the learning curve intersect with the learning curve of the currently best model? Most approaches create a learning curve model for this, implicitlysolvingamuchmoredifficultproblem.Whilethosemodels,ifappropriate, havethepotentialtoprovideadditionalinterestinginsights,thequestionarises whether simpler approaches could reliably solve those problems while needing much less online data. Approaches that remain faithful to this question level (suchassuccessivehalvingandhyperband)haveproveneffectiveandreceived considerable attention. Additionally, we see a clear opportunity for incorporating uncertainty into methods that address the binary question, effectively providing the chance that a particular learner will be better than another learning at a given budget. A learning curve method that makes use of all types of data resources.Learningcurvemethodscanmakeuseofvariousresourcestomodel the learning curve (see Fig 11). For example, the inverse power law model uses the current learner’s learning curve on the same dataset. In contrast, metalearningmodelsoftenalsomakeuseoflearningcurvesofeitherthecurrent learner or other learners on other datasets (see, e.g., Leite and Brazdil, 2005). A reasonable assumption is that the methods that utilise more types of data resourceswouldbemoreaccurate.Table1revealsthatnolearningcurvemodel utilises all types of data resources. Indeed, combining anchors across learners and datasets might be a complex task, but when this is done successfully, it will enormously increase our understanding of learning curves. Acknowledgements. We thank Pavel Brazdil, Isabelle Guyon, Aaron Klein, and Marco Loog for their insightful discussions and feedback on this survey. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 56 Learning Curves for Decision Making A Notation Table 2 contains