performance that can be obtained by a comparably small anchor point. Utility-Based Stopping Point The utility-based stopping point is the point at which the acquisition of further data points has a negative impact on the utility of the data analysing entity. Therefore, this concept is associated with utility curves. The utilitybasedstoppingpointisnotrelatedtothesaturationpointbut,ifatall,rather to the pre-exponential point; we denote it as bu . In Fig. 4, this is the peak of sat the yellow curve. Plateau The right-sided open interval bounded by the saturation point from the left is consistently called the plateau of the curve. However, a curve can also have intermediate plateaus,i.e.,intervalsof(almost)constantperformancewithout being the final plateau. Well-behaved Learning Curves To our knowledge, the notion of a well-behaved learning curve is first used by Provost et al (1999). A learning curve is said to be well behaved if its slope is monotonically non-decreasing (for error-based learning curves). An even stricter criterion demanding convexity of the curve, which implies monotonicity, has been introduced recently by Mohr and van Rijn (2021, 2023). The property of being well behaved is one of the true learning curve. The (linear interpolation of an) empirical learning curve can often violate this condition, Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 13 specifically when the number of validations conducted at the anchors is small or when the learning curve has reached a plateau. While it is known that not all learning curves are well behaved (Loog and Duin, 2012; Loog et al, 2019), empirical studies suggest that such curves are ratheranexceptionandthatmostsample-wise curvesarewellbehaved.Learning curves that are not well behaved are found above all in the context of deeplearning,whereadouble descent orpeaking phenomenoncanbeobserved (at times) for both sample-wise curves and iteration-wise curves (Nakkiran et al, 2020); the effect was also observed decades ago for other learners (Vallet et al, 1989). However, extensive empirical studies have shown that most sample-wise curvesareevenconvex (MohrandvanRijn,2023)andhencewell behaved. Some recent works suggest that potential ill behaviour can be mitigated by appropriate configuration or wrapping of learners (Mhammedi and Husain, 2021; Nakkiran et al, 2021; Viering et al, 2020). 2.5 Relation to Other Types of Performance Curves We briefly discuss the relation of learning curves to other types of curves and problem settings. These curves are fundamentally different from learning curves, and therefore, a more detailed coverage is beyond our scope. 2.5.1 Learning Curves in Active Learning Active learning is a setting where the data scientist can acquire the label of arbitraryinstances(Settles,2009)andhencecanactivelyincreasethetraining set. On a concrete data source with a concrete initial dataset, a specific active learningstrategycreatesadeterministically extendeddatasetforanyarbitrary anchor. While this allows drawing a curve that plots performance against the number of training instances, this curve is not the one described in Eq. (2), because the datasets are not sampled i.i.d. from but dictated by the PX×Y active learning strategy; they are sample-optimised. Fig. 2 displays how this theoretically relates to the normal sample-wise curve. We do not consider this type of learning curve in this survey. 2.5.2 Learning Curves under Optimal Class Distribution Similarly,weobtainsuchabiasedlearningcurveifwedonotpreservetheclass distribution.WeissandProvost(2003)haveshownthatitcanbeadvantageous to over-sample instances of a minority class if they occur substantially more seldom than instances of a majority class. One can then ask for the best class distributionforacertainanchor.Similartotheactivelearningcase,thiscreates a new distribution of datasets that does not coincide with P anymore. If X×Y we optimise over the class distribution at each anchor, we obtain a curve with thesameaxislabelsasasample-wise curvebutadifferentsemantics(andmost likely different values). For the case of two classes, this type of learning curve is obtained by taking the budget-wise maximum of a performance surface as proposed by Forman and Cohen (2004). Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 14 Learning Curves for Decision Making sample size etar rorre iterations/time etar rorre Sample-Wise Learning Curve Iteration-Wise Learning Curve num features etar rorre Feature Curve model capacity etar rorre Utility Curve Capacity Curve stream curve sampleoptimized curve budget Fig. 6: Feature curve example for a single learner, once for a fixed and finite dataset size and once for an infinite dataset size. 2.5.3 Learning Curves on Data Streams Another type of learning curve that violates the implicit assumptions made in Eq. (2) is obtained when learning from data streams, a scenario in which training instances are coming in sequentially and need to be processed under stricttimeandmemoryconstraints(Bifetetal,2018).Incrementallearnerslike Hoeffdingtrees(DomingosandHulten,2000)andmodelsinducedbystochastic gradient descent are natural solutions to this problem domain. When applied toadatastream,thesealgorithmsexplicitlyforget aninstanceonceithasbeen processed. This is not only to free memory but also to address the problem of concept drift,i.e.,thefactthatP changesovertime.Insuchacase,wedo X×Y nothavethat (a,n)=lim (a,n,t)butratherthat (a,n)= (a,n,n), t C →∞C C C where the learner is updated at every incoming training instance, and each of the n instances was considered exactly once; for example, similar to training a neural network for one epoch with batch size 1. While this produces a kind of sample-wise curve, the result is clearly different from the learning curve received in the normal