min (a,b ) is the (unknown) best performance of any learner on a A ref ∈ C the target size. Afamilyofslightlymoregeneralquestionstriestoorder asetAoflearning algorithms w.r.t. their performance at some (future) anchor b . We denote ref this ordering as π (a,b ). Here, b is typically the maximum availa A ref ref ∈ ∼C able training data, even if an iteration-wise curve is considered because then thisistheterminationperformanceofthatcurve.Inthesimplestcase,wecould ask for a concrete pair of two learning algorithms a , a whether (a ,b ) 1 2 1 ref C ≥ (a ,b ),i.e.,whichwillperformbetteratsomereferencepoint.Forexample, 2 ref C the work by Leite and Brazdil (2005) answers this question. If this question is simultaneously asked for a set of or even all possible pairs of algorithms, one asks for a partial or even the full ranking π (a,b ) of algorithms. A a A ref ∈ ∼C particular case is to ask only for the best algorithm a = argmin (a,b ), ∗ a ref C which implicitly answers that (a ,b ) (a,b ) for any learner a but ∗ ref ref C ≤ C without explicitly asking for any other comparisons. Still, the comparison is merelyqualitative,andansweringthisquestiondoesnotnecessarilyrequireto quantify any aspect of any learning curve. The above questions are merely qualitative and not quantitative, which gives rise to a third level of complexity, where the concrete values of b (Provost et al, 1999), p (Cortes et al, 1993), p (Baker et al, 2018; sat sat ref ChandrashekaranandLane,2017;LeiteandBrazdil,2003,2004),orbu (Weiss sat andTian,2008)arebeingmodelled.Here,thereferenceperformancep isthe ref performance at a fixed reference point, often the number of training samples available for cross-validation. All questions up to this point produce closed answers in the sense that the answer is either a boolean value, a number, or a finite ranking of candidates. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 29 Distribution estimates Range estimates Point estimates Portfolioofcurves Whatis Whatis C U Curvesoflearner Whatis (a, )or (a, , ) Whatis (a, )or (a, , ) C · C · · U · U · · Conservativeboundoncurve Determine (a, )or (a, , ) Determine (a, )or (a, , ) C · C · · U · U · · Value Whatisbsat Whatispsat Whatispref Whatisb s u at Ranking Whatis πa ∈ A∼C (a,bref) Binary bsat≤ bref psat≤ τ pref ≤ τ b s u at≤ bref Fig. 10: Technical questions that can be asked on learning curves. At the fourth level, the task is to make assertions about arbitrary points of a learning curve. However, the answers do not yet refer to the value of the learning curve itself but only a bound on those values. At a fifth level, we could eventually ask for a model of the whole learning curve of a learner a, i.e., (a, ) for sample-wise curves (Figueroa et al, 2012; C · Frey and Fisher, 1999; Gu et al, 2001; John and Langley, 1996; Mukherjee etal,2003)or (a,n, )foriteration-wise curvesgivenafixed(sample)anchor C · n (Cortes et al, 1993; Domhan et al, 2015). We can ask a similar question for the utility curve. While the question is on the same level, it is more general, as it is based on the learning curve itself (Last, 2007, 2009; Weiss and Tian, 2006) and combines it with other information such as acquisition costs. Finally,atthesixthandmostgenerallevel,wecouldaskforamodelofthe whole performance function , i.e., the model of the learning curves across all C learners (Klein et al, 2017a,b; Swersky et al, 2014). Analogously, this question could be asked for the whole utility function , which is arguably the most U complex and general question that can be asked, although we are not aware of any works that have done so. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 30 Learning Curves for Decision Making Sincealloftheabovequestionsareansweredbasedonobservationalstatistics, we can also consider noise and uncertainty aspects for the quantitative questions.Inthesimplestcase(bluelayer,cf.Sec.3.1),weonlygetpointestimates, i.e., the estimate of at one or a set of points. Since these estimates C are always afflicted with uncertainty, it is reasonable to ask for quantifications of this uncertainty. One form is to express strict bounds as in the fourth layer,whichmaybederivedfromassumptionsaboutthelearningcurveshape, e.g., convexity (Mohr and van Rijn, 2021, 2023). Another form is to express probabilistic bounds like confidence intervals around (Figueroa et al, 2012; C Koshute et al, 2021) (cf. Sec. 3.2). In the most general form, we can ask for a full belief model of the learning curves, specifying a probability distribution over the values of at one point or a set thereof (Domhan et al, 2015; Klein C et al, 2017a,b; Swersky et al, 2014) (cf. Sec. 3.3). It is common practice to solve relatively simple questions by implicitly answering more complex ones. For example, a typical question in the context of model selection is whether the performance of a candidate learner at some given data or in the limit will beat a known baseline (Domhan et al,