using 80% of the data for training. Sinceempiricallearningcurvesaretheonlywaytogaininsightsabouttrue learning curves, quite some studies have been published with the sole goal of Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 9 sharing empirical learning curves with the community and thereby improving the understanding of how they behave. Perlich et al (2003) contrast the learning curves on decision trees and logistic regression on different datasets. Notably, the authors also compare learning curves, e.g., they report whether one curve is below the other (dominates it) on all considered training set sizes orwhetherthetwolearningcurvescross.Severalotherstudiesreportlearning curves for specific learners. Ng and Jordan (2001) compare logistic regression and naive Bayes. Mørch et al (1997) conduct a study similar to the one by Perlich et al (2003) to compare linear vs. non-linear classifiers on a smaller scale. Recently, a number of learning curve databases have been published, i.e., learning curves of different network architectures on typical image classification datasets (Bornschein et al, 2020; Dong and Yang, 2020; Siems et al, 2020),learningcurvesofdifferentmachinelearningalgorithmsontabulardata (Mohr et al, 2022), and for mixtures of these tasks (Eggensperger et al, 2021; Pfisterer et al, 2022). Empirical studies of this type do not answer generalising questions about learning curves but rather report experimental results. This is different from contributions in which certain model assumptions are made and data is compared to those models, e.g., with the aim to compute the goodness of fit of that model. In Sec. 3, we briefly discuss some of such models. 2.3 Utility Curves The concept of learning curves can be further generalised to a utility curve (Last, 2007, 2009; Weiss and Tian, 2008). The utility usually involves a trade-off between the performance and the computational cost of training a model. The specific details can be different per task. The utility is connected to the learning curve in so far as the utility is also a function of the budget and is directly influenced by the predictive performance. Therefore, one could argue that the utility curve is obtained by passing the learning curve to U the utility function alongside other parameters that influence the utility, most notably the cost of acquiring new instances and the cost to train a model on the respective dataset size. The learning curves associated with utility costs are visualised in Fig. 4 (orange) and compared to a normal learning curve. Assuming there is a linear cost associated with further training the classifier, wecanseethattheutilitycurve(whichmakesatrade-offbetweenperformance and cost) peaks at a given point, and deteriorates afterwards. 2.4 Terminology of Learning Curves While this survey is not primarily about the shapes of learning curves, the shapesoflearningcurvesplayanimportantrolewhenusingthemtomakedecisions. Hence, we consider it necessary to convey some of the most important insightsaboutthebasicsoftheshapesoflearningcurves.However,wereferto arecentexhaustivesurveyontheshapesoflearningcurves(VieringandLoog, 2023) for details on this topic. Fig. 5 visualises some important concepts. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 10 Learning Curves for Decision Making sample size etar rorre iterations/time etar rorre Sample-Wise Learning Curve Iteration-Wise Learning Curve num features etar rorre Feature Curve model capacity etar rorre Utility Curve Capacity Curve stream curve sampleoptimized curve budget Fig. 4: A utility curve with the corresponding learning curve. Anchor Points In this survey, we adopt the term anchor to refer to a point for which the empiricallearningcurvecarriesaperformanceestimate.Thereisnoestablished name for such points in literature. They are called sample sizes in (John and Langley,1996;LeiteandBrazdil,2007;Provostetal,1999),andthoseauthors refer to a collection of such samples sizes as a schedule (Figueroa et al, 2012; John and Langley, 1996; Meek et al, 2002; Provost et al, 1999). However, for iteration-wise curves, the term ‘sample’ is misleading because the curve plots performance against the number of times all instances (out of a fixed set) are presentedtothelearner,whichisnotthesameassamplesize.Besides,theterm samplesizeisquiteoverloadedinthecontextofmachinelearning,becausethis field deals with various types of samples in different contexts, e.g., train and validation samples, etc. Another terminology observed sometimes is the one of sample landmarks (Fu¨rnkranz and Petrak, 2001; Leite and Brazdil, 2005). However, this term is also slightly confusing, since landmarks are generally understood as the performances of cheap-to-evaluate learners, which was also the motivation for this terminology by Fu¨rnkranz and Petrak (2001). A less used terminology is the term anchor (Kielh¨ofer et al, 2024; Kolachina et al, 2012;MohrandvanRijn,2021,2023),whichisnotambiguousinthemachine learning context and captures the idea that analysis is based on some selected points. It serves well to immediately create an association with a particular size of a sampled training data set or a number of visited instances that is used in the context of building an empirical learning curve. Throughout this paper, we formally use the symbol b to refer to an anchor.Thereby,weabstractawayfromsamplesizesn oriterationt.Inother words, the symbol b is used to indicate points on both sample-wise curves or iteration-wise curves, and it should be clear from the context which one is meant (if the difference is relevant). For example, in Fig. 3 above, we have the following anchors. For the sample-wise curve, a geometric schedule with n 2i/2 i N