out by humans. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 25 Early Stopping vs. Stopping in Data Acquisition 0.30 µ MatterofEarlyStopping a, · µ MatterofDataAcqusition 0.25 (argmina∈Aµa,∞ , · ) 0.20 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 EarlyStopping avaiabledata DataAcquisition stopshere stopshere Fig. 9: Early stopping with sample-wise curves stops the training process of asinglelearnera atitssaturationpointusingits(actuallyempirical)learning curve.Itshowsthelearningcurveoftwolearners,thebluecurveandthegreen dashed curve. The latter has the best saturation performance. The available datamarksarestrictiontothisprocess.Incontrast,dataacquisitionconsiders the available data as the decision variable, and it stops collecting data when all learners have reached their saturation performance. 2. RoleofAvailableData: Inearlystopping,theavailableamountoftraining data is a given constraint under which early stopping operates, and data acquisition precisely seeks to control this quantity in an economically optimal fashion. 3. Used Performance Curve: Early Stopping uses a single learning curve of learner a to decide upon early stopping of the training of a. Data acquisition uses the learning curves of all learners under consideration (i.e., a finite set A) and considers the budget-wise best performance achievable (by any learner). To clarify this difference, consider also the right (green) part of Fig. 9. The learnera maybethebestsolutionavailablegiventhe1500datapoints(inthis case,a barelyneeds500ofthemtoattainsaturationperformance).However,if moredatawere available,thenatleastoneotherlearnercouldtakeadvantage of that additional data and outperform a. The figure shows the curve of an optimal learner a argmin µ that has the best performance if no ∗ a A a, ∈ ∈ ∞ limit is posed on the available training data (as in Cortes et al (1994)). Only after 3000 instances, no learner will improve the overall possible performance anymore; therefore, at this point, the data acquisition process stops. 4.1.3 Early Discarding In many setups, the learner itself is a matter of optimisation. Consider the situationwherewehavea(possiblyinfinite)set oflearners,e.g.,afinitesetof algorithms, each of which can be instantiated with a possibly infinite number ofhyper-parametrisations.Thetaskistofindthe(hyper-parametrised)learner which performs best for the given data of size n in the sense that it creates, Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 26 Learning Curves for Decision Making on average, the best model. Formally, if A is the (infinite) set of parametrised learners, the goal is to find argmin (a,n). (7) a A C ∈ This task is commonly known as model selection. Whileitisuncommoninliteraturetobesoexplicitanddescribethemodel selection problem through the value of the learning curve at some sample size,thisformulationisratherpreciseandinsightful.Itemphasisesthatwhich learner is best might depend on the number of available training points. Note that one needs to separate some portion of the data for validation in practice to estimate model performances. In other words, most approaches in practice do not even address the above problem but instead argmin (a, αn ), (8) a A C ⌈ ⌉ ∈ where α ]0,1[ (open interval) is the training portion, typically between 70% ∈ and90%,wheretheremainingportionof1 α isusedtoestimate (a, αn ), − C ⌈ ⌉ typically in some (possibly repeated) hold-out validation. We could conceive that this procedure of estimating (a, αn ) might C ⌈ ⌉ involve the construction of an empirical learning curve as a sub-routine or on-the-fly. First, if a is an iterative learner, then the model performance (a, αn ) = (a, αn ,t ) is the performance of the iteration-wise curve at ∗ C ⌈ ⌉ C ⌈ ⌉ some point t where the learning process is stopped. Therefore, the whole ∗ iteration-wise curve (a, αn ,t ) is available for analysis. Second, even if ∗ C ⌈ ⌉ a is not incremental, one could create an schedule α ,..,α of increasing 1 k { } α α and thereby create a sample-wise curve (Mohr and van Rijn, 2023). i ≤ Such a sample-wise curve would also offer the perspective, via extrapolation, to address Eq. (7) rather than just Eq. (8). In the light of the availability of such a (partial) empirical learning curve, early discarding is the practice of aborting the performance estimation procedure of a candidate as soon as it becomes apparent from that curve that the candidate cannot be the solution to the above optimisation problem. Formally, this is to drop a candidate a as soon as the criterion (a,b )> min (a ,b ) (9) ref ∗ ref C a∗∈ AC can be verified, where b is usually n or αn . In other words, as soon as ref ⌈ ⌉ it can be shown that a is not the best learner of all possible learners A, no further resources should be committed to training learner a. Note that, even though the terms are frequently mixed up in literature, this is very different from early stopping, in which the convergence of the curve of a single learner is considered in isolation (cf. Fig. 1). Early discarding has been applied to both observation (Adriaensen et al, 2023;MohrandvanRijn,2021,2023;Ruhkopfetal,2023)anditeration(Adriaensenetal,2023;Domhanetal,2015;Kleinetal,2017b;Ruhkopfetal,2023; Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 27 Swersky et al, 2014) learning curves. In the first case, one is sampling from (a, ) at different anchors n and