number of training samples (expressed by n), no matter how large t becomes. In fact, Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 7 sample size etar rorre iterations/time etar rorre Sample-Wise Learning Curve Iteration-Wise Learning Curve num features etar rorre Feature Curve model capacity etar rorre Utility Curve Capacity Curve stream curve sampleoptimized curve sample size budget etar rorre iterations/time etar rorre Sample-Wise Learning Curve Iteration-Wise Learning Curve num features etar rorre Feature Curve model capacity etar rorre Utility Curve Capacity Curve stream curve sampleoptimized curve budget Fig. 2: Left: (Standard) sample-wise curve (green) for a single learner on a particulardatasourcetogetherwithlearningcurvesundersampleoptimisation (pink) and learning curves on streams (blue). Right: iteration-wise curves of a singlelearneronaparticulardatasourcefortwodifferentdatasetsizesn <n . 1 2 since iterative learners typically automatically stop the learning process as soonasnoprogressisobserved,itoftenholdsthat (a,n)=lim (a,n,t). t C →∞C But this is not necessarily the case, specifically if an algorithm stops early (in the iteration-wise curve), e.g., to avoid over-fitting (as the neural network in Fig. 3). Note that as t grows, each training instance is considered an unlimited number of times; hence, iteration-wise curves show how much the learner can make out of a constant number of training instances. Instead, sample-wise curvesshowtheperformanceofthelearnerasthenumberofexamples grows. The latter typically means, for an infinite input space, that the information basis available to the learner is growing strictly bigger, while the information is constant in the case of iteration-wise curves. Note that while the learning success can be expressed in a metric that ought to be maximised or minimised, in this paper we assume for simplicity that they are to be minimised. This is why the performance is expressed throughaloss suchastheerrorrate.Inthiscase,learningcurvesare(usually) decreasing. However, more generally, one can also be interested in increasing learning curves, e.g., when considering accuracy or the F1 measure. Since learningcurvescanbesimplymirroredatthex-axis,everyapproachdiscussed in this paper is applicable to both increasing or decreasing learning curves. For simplicity, this survey assumes that lower performance values are better (error rate, log-loss/cross-entropy, Brier score, mean-square-error, etc.). 2.2 Empirical Learning Curves Theabovedefinitionsoflearningcurvesarepurelytheoretical.Thisisbecause we cannot evaluate equations (1-3) in practice. First, the out-of-sample error , i.e., Eq. (1) cannot be computed in practice since the measure P is out R X×Y unknown.Relyingonthiserror,thelearningcurvevaluescannotbecomputed either. The necessity to average over the oftentimes uncountable set of all possible train sets can add additional problems. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 8 Learning Curves for Decision Making 0.200 0.175 0.150 0.125 0 1000 2000 3000 Sizenofthetrainingsetdtr etarrorre EmpiricalSample-WiseLearningCurves RF NN SVM 0 50 100 150 200 250 Iterationt(trees/epochs/optimizationiterations) etarrorre EmpiricalIteration-WiseLearningCurves RF NN SVM Fig. 3: Empirical learning curves for the waveform dataset. Left: sample-wise curves at different training set sizes up to 80% of the data. The remaining 20% are used to compute the error. Right: iteration-wise curves withoneentryforeachforestsize(RF),epoch(NN),oroptimizationiteration (SVM) when a fixed set of 80% of the available data is used in each iteration for training and the rest to compute the error. To compute learning curves in practice, we rely on empirical estimates of theabovequantities.Weestimatetheout-of-sampleerrorbytheinternalerror: 1 (cid:88) (h)= loss(y,h(x)), (4) in R d | |(x,y) d ∈ where d is the dataset used for assessing the performance of hypothesis h. Note that the dataset d may or may not contain instances used to create the hypothesis h. In most practical applications, dataset d consists of instances thathavenotbeenseenduringthecreationofhypothesish(i.e.,thetestset). However,intheory,theinternalerrorcanalsobeestimatedbasedonthetrain set d or a combination of instances from the train set and test set. tr We consider an empirical learning curve any set of estimates of a true learning curve for different sizes or iterations. We can use various estimation procedures to estimate the performance using a given training size, such as using a regular holdout set or cross-validation. The latter leads to various estimates, and averaging over these estimates yields an estimate of the sample-wise curve in Eq. (2) at size n. To obtain an empirical estimate of the iterative learning curve in Eq. (3), we do the same except that we stop the learning algorithm after t iterations. Fig.3showsempiricallearningcurvesforaRandomForest(RF),aNeural Network(NN)with100neuronsinahiddenlayer,anasupportvectormachine (SVM)withRBFkernelonaconcreteandwidelyusedbenchmarkdataset(the waveform dataset). The empirical curves are the scatter points; the lines here are only a visual aid. The error rate is here obtained from a single validation fold, i.e., without averaging, which explains the rather unsmooth behavior. The iteration-wise curves were created using 80% of the data for training. Sinceempiricallearningcurvesaretheonlywaytogaininsightsabouttrue learning curves, quite some studies have been published with the sole goal of Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 9 sharing empirical learning curves with the community and thereby improving the understanding of how they behave. Perlich et al (2003) contrast the learning curves on decision trees and logistic regression on different datasets. Notably, the authors also compare learning curves, e.g., they report whether one curve is below the other (dominates it) on all considered training set sizes orwhetherthetwolearningcurvescross.Severalotherstudiesreportlearning curves for specific learners. Ng and Jordan (2001) compare