possible slopes of the learning curve between two anchors. Distribution Estimates The first approach to predict distribution estimates for any anchor point was presented by Domhan et al (2015). The approach assumes learning curves to be instances of a parametric model that is a linear combination of known model classes, such as the inverse power law, and others (Gu et al, 2001). Themaindifferencetotheaboveapproachesisthat,insteadofestimatingthe parameters through a maximum likelihood approach, they estimate, for each Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 49 parameter, the whole posterior distribution adopting Monte-Carlo Markov Chains (MCMC). The approach is successfully used to early discard neural network architectures by predicting the saturation performance p of an sat iteration-wise curve,therebydiscardinglearnersassoonastheprobabilitythat itiscompetitivedropsbelowapre-definedthreshold.TheBayesianmodelproposed by Domhan et al (2015) also explicitly estimates the noise σ2 , which a,b is assumed to be homoscedastic, i.e., identical for all budgets b. In this sense, the approach quantifies both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty (cf. Sec. 3). A recent alternative for estimating distributions has been proposed by Adriaensen et al (2023) through the notion of prior fitted neural networks (PFN)(Hollmannetal,2023).BasedontheapproachbyDomhanetal(2015), Adriaensen et al (2023) consider a set of basis functions, over which they define a prior. They then sample a large number of curves from this prior and train a variation of a transformer neural network with it, which is able to predict distributions for a target anchor based on a partial learning curve. Since no sampling from the posterior is required anymore, compared to the MCMC approach by Domhan et al (2015), predictions can be obtained much faster,andtheauthorsclaimthatthepredictionperformanceiscomparableor evenbetter,whichcouldhowevernotbeconfirmedinsubsequentexperiments discussed below. The latest approach we are aware of is the robust estimation RoBER presented by Egele et al (2024). The approach follows the idea of MCMC introducedbyDomhanetal(2015)butappliesadifferentsamplingalgorithm to obtain more stable estimates. The results suggest that classical learning extrapolation significantly outperforms PFN-based extrapolations at the current state of research. 5.2.2 Utility Prediction at Any Point Utility prediction combines learning curve models as discussed in Sec. 5.2.1 with utility models as discussed in Sec. 5.1.5. The learning curve model ˆf is used as a basis to estimate the performance at any point, and the utility at budget b is then computed as a function of the modelled performanceˆf (b) at a and the associated costs for budget b. The first approach in this direction was presented by Last (2007). This work is very similar to the works of Weiss and Tian (2006) but makes utility forecasts rather than looking back. Therefore, it is projective instead of retrospective. The error rate that serves as input to the model is obtained from a parametric model (i.e., a power-law) trained on the empirical values obtained at earlier budgets. This framework enables one to analytically compute the optimal dataset size. The main advantage of the approach over the one of Weiss and Tian (2006) is that one does not need to go through several acquisition iterations, which is a benefit if those are associated with fixed costs. Therefore, the learning curve has become a resource for decision making.Whilethisworkassumestheempiricallearningcurvetobeavailable,Last Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 50 Learning Curves for Decision Making (2009) embeds his idea into an algorithm that follows a progressive sampling scheme in a follow-up work. One use case in which the above techniques have been adopted has been reported in the context of automated software configuration (Sarkar et al, 2015). The context of that paper is that every instance is a parametrisation of a software library, and obtaining its label requires the costly execution of a benchmark on such a configuration. The goal is to understand how many observations must be acquired to learn a reliable prediction model. To this end,theauthorsadopttheprojectivesamplingapproachofLast(2007,2009). The latter work raises an important issue by stating that knowing the saturationpointis(often)notenough.Instead,weoftenalsoneed toknowthe performance at the saturation point. Sarkar et al (2015) argue that if the user is unaware of the expected performance at that point, substantial resources might be required to obtain the observations to reach the saturation point. However,iftheactualperformanceatthatpointisknowntobemediocre,the user could anticipate this and not invest the required resources. To this end, they also incorporate the utility model proposed by Weiss and Tian (2008). 5.2.3 Performance at Any Point for Any Learner The approaches discussed in this section are the most general ones developed todate regardinglearning curves inthat theycreate amodel forthe complete function ,i.e.,generalisingbothoverbothbudgetsandlearners.Suchamodel C is so versatile that it can be used in all types of decision-making situations, e.g.,dataacquisition,earlystopping,andearlydiscarding.Additionally,these can be used for model acquisition (selecting a yet unseen promising model). Freeze-thawBayesianoptimisationmodelsthebehaviouroflearningcurves through Gaussian processes (Swersky et al, 2014). An important contribution of that work is a non-stationary kernel for Gaussian processes that supports exponentially decaying learning curve models; it can easily be checked that standard kernels like a linear or Gaussian kernel do not lead to meaningful learning curve models. Assuming that the kernel reflects the model class