best-predictive models. As was pointed out by Gu et al (2001), the model class that can best accommodate a given set of anchor points is not always the one that will make the best predictions on a high anchor when having been fit only on some initial anchors. To understand the learningcurveofalearneronagivendataset,oneisinterestedinabest-fitting model class. For extrapolation, one is interested in a best-predictive one. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 20 Learning Curves for Decision Making Our work does not seek to give a broad overview of different model classes but rather about the usage of such models. We expose the inverse power law model because it is arguably the most prominent model class and has been advocated by many authors as a good fit for nearest neighbours, SVMs, decision trees, and neural networks (Frey and Fisher, 1999; Gu et al, 2001; Hess and Wei, 2010; Richter and Khoshgoftaar, 2019). However, other models have been proposed, e.g., based on differential equations (Boonyanunta and Zeephongsekul, 2004) or other physical laws (Gu et al, 2001), and authors have argued that other models, such as logarithmic shape can be a better fit (Gu et al, 2001; Singh, 2005). For an updated and exhaustive overview of used model classes, we refer to the work by Viering and Loog (2023). 3.2 Range Estimates of the Learning Curves It has been recognised that incorporating some notion of uncertainty into the model itself is important (Mukherjee et al, 2003). Formally, this amounts to learn a range estimate function ˆf : N R2 such that ˆf (b) [u,v] with a a → ≡ some pre-defined semantic relationship between µ and the interval [u,v]. In a,b Fig. 8, this type of estimate is visualised through the orange area. The semantics of the interval [u,v] depend on what exactly is being modelled, which also implies how the model is created. In the earliest known attemptonthismatter, Mukherjeeetal(2003)modelthe(believed)interquartile range of the actual distribution f(a,b) with this interval, i.e., values that areexpectedtobeobservedwithacertainprobabilityifsamplingataspecific anchor (aleatoric uncertainty). In this approach, two parametric (i.e., inverse power law) models are built, one from the 25 and one from the 75 quantile for each observed anchor b. Even though the mean does not necessarily lie between these quartiles in general, this is the case in a Gaussian distribution, whichisasensibleassumptionasexplainedabove.Incontrast, Figueroaetal (2012) use it to model a confidence interval of µ (epistemic uncertainty). a,b In this specific case, only one parametric model is learned, and the confidence intervalaroundthecurveisobtainedthroughanalyticalratherthanstochastic techniques. The confidence interval-based approach can also be thought of as putting a probabilistic bound on the gap between the predicted performance ˆf (b) and the true value µ . a a,b Again, the mere presence of interval-based predictions that express epistemic uncertainty should not lead to the conclusion or belief that there is a necessary relationship to correctness. In particular, an epistemic uncertainty of0doesnotimplyacorrectprediction.Supposethemodelˆf ischosenfroma a classofwhichthemeancurveµ isnotamember.Inthatcase,itisguaranteed a, · that there will be wrong predictions, regardless of the epistemic uncertainty expressed by the model. But even if µ is among the models from which ˆf a, a · can be built, it can still (and usually will) happen that, based on insufficient observations, a wrong ˆf will be picked. In such a case, it is still conceivable a that, depending on the probabilistic model on which ˆf rests, the epistemic a uncertaintywouldbe0foranchorsb whereasf(a,b)=ˆf (b);hereˆf (b)isjust a a ̸ Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 21 a value since the epistemic uncertainty of 0 means that the interval ˆf (b) has a only one value. 3.3 Distribution Estimates of Learning Curves In a more ambitious case, we can try to learn a full belief model of the learning curve . Formally, this amounts to learn a distribution estimate function ˆf : N C p p is a distribution in the domain of the performance measure . a → { | } Fig. 8, this model corresponds to the sequence of dashed orange distributions (in this figure, displayed for only 14 values of budget b). As with the previous approaches, one typically uses parametric functions (e.g., the inverse power law) as a basis but specifies distributions over their parameters insteadofasingle(basedonthemaximumlikelihood)assignment. The distribution over parameters then induces a distribution of the space of learningcurves.Suchabeliefmodelis,forexample,well-definedinaBayesian frameworkthatdefinestheposteriordistributionofmodelsgiventheobserved data and assumes a certain model class. This posterior distribution cannot be efficiently computed exactly but approximate it through sampling (Domhan et al, 2015; Klein et al, 2017b). Clearly,distributionestimatesarethemostflexiblewayofmodellinguncertainty and allow many interesting operations. In particular, one can quantify the probability that the limit performance of a learning curve will be above or below some threshold τ, which is very useful for confidence-based early discarding (Domhan et al, 2015). 4 A Framework to Categorise Learning Curves Methods for Decision Making Based on the common ground of learning curves and their models introduced inSec.2andSec.3,thissectionpresentsaframeworkforcategorising decisionmakingmethodsthatuselearningcurves.Weidentifythreeorthogonalcriteria along