observations of recent trends are being utilised. Nonetheless, these methods perform well empirically and come with theoretical guarantees. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 36 Learning Curves for Decision Making 5.1.2 Candidate Ranking Themethodsinthissectionaimtorankthelearningalgorithmswithrespectto their(expected)performanceatthefulldatasetsize.InourschemeinSec.4.2 and Fig. 10, we denote this question as π (a,b ). Depending on the a A ref ∈ ∼C available resources (cf. Sec. 4.3), such a ranking can be based on the other learning curves available from other contexts and the explicit characterisation of such contexts, e.g., features that describe datasets or algorithms. Ranking Without Context Description The first approach we are aware of to address this problem was metalearning on data samples (MDS) presented by Leite and Brazdil (2005) through the notion of comparing two learners, i.e., a ranking of two. Given a dataset, MDS decides which of two algorithms is the better choice on a given dataset. Therefore, it can be used for early discarding. The authors specifically use an SVM and a C5 decision tree but rightfully claim that any algorithm could be used. The formal basis of the work is the same as the one introduced in their previous work (Leite and Brazdil, 2003, 2004). Similar to previous work, it assumesthatempiricallearningcurves(withstandardisedanchorsizes)forthe learnerunderexaminationarealreadyknownforother datasets.Additionally, it builds upon the idea of quantifying the distance between the target and the other datasets based on the sum of squared distances over the alreadyknownperformancesatanchorsofthetargetdataset.Oncethemostsimilark learning curves have been identified, MDS assigns a score to each learner that is the mean accuracy of its k nearest neighbours (at the final anchor). It then selects the algorithm with the higher score. Leite and Brazdil (2005) acknowledge that this method may result in poor rankings because even the closest learning curve on other datasets can still be substantially different and propose learning curve adaption as a remedy. Instead of forming the mean directly over the target anchors of the nearest neighbour empirical learning curves, the authors first scale those curves to make them more similar to the shape already observed on the target dataset. To this end, they compute a scaling constant under which the overall anchorwisedistanceisminimisedandthenmultiplyallthescoreswiththisconstant. This version of the MDS algorithm is called AMDS (probably for Adaptive MDS). Interestingly, one can argue that this adaption technique could be applied either before or after determining the k nearest neighbours. Doing it before could lead to other (and better) nearest neighbours because then the neighboursaredeterminedmorewithrespecttotheshape ofthelearningcurve,and theoffset playsmuchlessofarole.However,intheabovepaper,theadaption is done after retrieving the neighbours. Theauthorsextendedtheapproachbycreatinganonlinesamplingscheme with the SetGen algorithm (Leite and Brazdil, 2007). SetGen is an online adaption of AMDS in that, after each acquired anchor, it is decided whether andwhichanchorshouldbeevaluatedwitheachalgorithm;thisconsidersboth Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 37 the (believed) accuracy and the runtime. This procedure can be seen as a way of racing between the algorithms. The potential of each additional amount of budget is judged based on the metalearning database. Animplicitassumptionofallapproachesinthislineofresearchisthatthe datasets in the database from which performances are extracted need to be at least as big as the target dataset. This issue was first explicitly treated in the Pairwise Curve Comparison approach (PCC) (van Rijn et al, 2015). This algorithm builds upon the works of Leite and Brazdil (2010) and implements a voting scheme to identify the best learning algorithm of a portfolio; votes are distributed based on wins, which are determined based on the predicted performanceatthecompletedatasetd.vanRijnetal(2015)explicitlydiscuss theissueifthesizesofdatasetsinthedatabaseandthetargetdatasetarenot identical.Ingeneral,thepointforwhichpredictionsmustbemadeistypically not one of the anchors; it is typically not a power of 2 but rather 90% of the given dataset size (due to the holdout scheme). A remedy is to resort to the closest available anchor in the schedule. However, if the highest anchor available for another dataset is much smaller than the required training size of the target dataset, then it is unclear how that curve should be used. Ranking With Context Description Thefirstworkweareawareofthatrealisesanexplicitcontextdescriptionwas proposed by Leite and Brazdil (2008, 2010). Similar to the methods discussed earlier, these methods select the k nearest datasets to measure the relevance of known complete learning curves of other datasets for performance prediction on the target dataset. The main difference is that, in addition to the contribution of the partial learning curve itself to the distance, they also use the distance between the datasets in terms of their meta-features. More precisely, they compute the Manhattan distance between seven range-normalised dataset meta-features, e.g., dataset size, number of symbolic and numerical attributes, etc. The overall distance between the datasets is then the sum of the distance between the partial learning curves and the distance in terms of meta-features.ThisworkwasmarginallyrefinedintheSelectionofAlgorithms using Metalearning approach(SAM),whichappliesthesamelogicbutassigns a weight to each of the two distance sources (Leite and Brazdil, 2010); the weight is however implicitly assumed to be set to 0.5. ArecentandentirelydifferentapproachtocandidaterankingistheMASIF transformer framework (Ruhkopf et al, 2023). This approach takes partial learningcurvesofdifferentlearnersonthecurrenttask,whichmayhavepotentiallydifferentlengthsandcombinesthemwithdatasetmeta-featuresinorder to predict latent utility values of each learner as expected for the