values at different (cheap) anchors and potentially additional contextualising attributes. Using these attributes, one explicitly or implicitly generalises over datasets orlearning algorithms (orboth).Modelsthatgeneraliseoverdatasets are typically called meta-models and rather aim at model ranking (Brazdil etal,2022;Ruhkopfetal,2023),whichwediscussinSec.5.1.2.Thisisbecause Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 43 it is difficult to generalise exact performance across datasets. When generalising over learners, one typically trains a single model for the target dataset, trained from learning curves on the same dataset belonging to other learning algorithms. Models that generalise over learners are typically called surrogate models (Eggensperger et al, 2018). We organise this section by how explicit the generalisation is made over one of the two concepts. If no additional attributes are available, one implicitlyassumesthatallentriesinthedatabasearetoadegreesuitabletopredict values in a new situation. There is no explicit context in this case, and we are generalising implicitly over datasets or learners. Since no explicit contextualisation exists, those approaches can be used for both purposes, regardless of their original purpose. In contrast, additional contextualising attributes can describe the dataset, i.e., we have meta-features of the datasets available, or they can describe the learning algorithms to which the learning curve values belong. In principle, one could utilise both types of additional attributes, but we are not aware of any approaches that adopt both. Generalization Without Explicit Context Generalisation from learning curves without explicit context means to predict the performance of a given learner on some dataset based on previously acquired learning curves that are not equipped with additional information, i.e., features describing the dataset or the algorithm used to produce them. To justify the prediction model, the existing empirical learning curves either stem from the same algorithm on other datasets, or other algorithms on the same dataset. Either of these implicitly qualifies them to be relevant for the new task. In other words, one simply uses a set of unannotated existing learning curves as aids to predict the behaviour of a new, only partially known, learning curve. Chandrashekaran and Lane (2017) developed an approach that explicitly used regression to predict the target performance without context. Probably without noticing, the approach mainly re-invents the approaches previously developed by Leite and Brazdil (2005, 2007, 2010); van Rijn et al (2015), since it computes the most similar other learning curves in the portfolio and obtains a prediction based on the average over those curves. The three differences are that Chandrashekaran and Lane (2017) (i) consider uncertainty in the prediction based on the variance in the neighbourhood, (ii) adopt an affinetransformation(insteadofalineartransformation)oftheexistinglearning curves and apply this before selecting the most similar ones, and (iii) that theydonotuseafixedschedulebut,duetothefocusoniteration-wise curves, simply a continuous schedule that is stopped as soon as there is enough evidencethatthetargetperformancewillnotbebetterthanacurrentthreshold. The Euclidean norm between the vectors describing the performances at the anchors is used as the distance function between two curves. ThereasonwhytheapproachisdiscussedhereandnotinSec.5.1.2together with the others is subtle and worth being discussed. In both lines of research, Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 44 Learning Curves for Decision Making targetperformancevaluesfromrelatedcurvesareaveragedtoestimatetheperformance of the current learner. However, Chandrashekaran and Lane (2017) explicitly treat this as a performance prediction, which is then used for early discardingbycomparingagainstathreshold.Incontrast,theworksintheline of Leite and Brazdil (2005) do not treat this value as an actual prediction but simply as some score used to order a pair or a set of learners. While the approach generalises across algorithm configurations, it ignores the configurations and generalises from learning curves without explicit context. In other words, there is no reason why the approach could not be used also for generalisation across datasets. Cardona-Escobar et al (2017) presented an approach that predicts values atall anchors.Theauthorsadoptaseriesofsupportvectorregressionmodels, one for each anchor not evaluated so far. It is not entirely clear with which data the models are trained, but we presume that it follows the same logic as Chandrashekaran and Lane (2017) and uses the fully known learning curves of previously evaluated neural network configurations to do so. Interestingly, similar to chaining (Gkioxari et al, 2016) in classification, they use as inputs forthej-thfutureanchornotonlytheknownpartiallearningcurvevaluesbut also use the predictions for the anchor points predicted before j. Generalization With an Explicit Algorithm Context Generalisationacrossalgorithmsonlyconsidersthetargetdatasetandassumes that a number of (complete) empirical learning curves on that dataset are already available for different algorithms. The explicit generalisation requires that the previous learning curves are explicitly associated with features describing the algorithm to which they belong. Bakeretal(2018)proposeamethodthatusesfeaturesdescribingboth the learning curve (including up to second-order differences) and the algorithm. The approach predicts the performance of neural networks based on features that describe the architecture (number of layers and weights) as well as the hyperparameters of the learning algorithm (such as learning rate, learning ratedecay,etc.).Theyadoptlinearandkernel-basedsupportvectorregression machines,randomforests,andsimplelinearregressionbasedonordinaryleast squares. Even though the authors suggest using kernel-based support vector regressionmachines,theyfindthatsimplelinearregressionalsooftencompares highly competitive for this prediction task. Followingthisidea,Longetal(2020)additionallyaddtextualdescriptions of the architecture to predict the learning curves of neural networks. Indeed, thearchitecturedescriptionbyBakeretal(2018)israthersimplisticandonly immediately well suited if