the space of learningcurves.Suchabeliefmodelis,forexample,well-definedinaBayesian frameworkthatdefinestheposteriordistributionofmodelsgiventheobserved data and assumes a certain model class. This posterior distribution cannot be efficiently computed exactly but approximate it through sampling (Domhan et al, 2015; Klein et al, 2017b). Clearly,distributionestimatesarethemostflexiblewayofmodellinguncertainty and allow many interesting operations. In particular, one can quantify the probability that the limit performance of a learning curve will be above or below some threshold τ, which is very useful for confidence-based early discarding (Domhan et al, 2015). 4 A Framework to Categorise Learning Curves Methods for Decision Making Based on the common ground of learning curves and their models introduced inSec.2andSec.3,thissectionpresentsaframeworkforcategorising decisionmakingmethodsthatuselearningcurves.Weidentifythreeorthogonalcriteria along which those approaches can be categorised. The first criterion relates to the decision-making situation in which learning curves are used. We discuss these situations exhaustively in Sec. 4.1. The second dimension covers the technical question that is answered about a learning curve to support the decision. For example, are we interested in the saturation point or a complete model? These technical questions are sketched in Sec. 4.2, and we structure the literature review of Sec. 5 according to this axis. Finally, different data resources can be used to conduct an analysis with learning curves, e.g., other learning curves or features describing the datasets or the learning algorithms. These resources are covered in Sec. 4.3. 4.1 Types of Decision-making Situations Learning curves are an important resource in at least three types of decisionmaking situations: Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 22 Learning Curves for Decision Making 1. Quantitative Data Acquisition Consider the situation where a data scientist has a model trained on a set of observations, the performance is known,andthereistheoptiontospendadditionalresources(e.g.,money orlabellingeffort)toobtainadditionaltrainingobservations.Thedecision thatneedstobemadeis:Theacquisitionofhowmanymorelabelsiseconomicallyreasonable?Thisquestionhasanobviousconnectiontothefield ofactive learning,whichaddressesthequestionofwhich instancesshould belabellednext(qualitativeacquisition).Anotherquestioniswhetherwe should acquire other features instead. 2. Early Stopping (of training an independently considered model). In the situation where one is committed to some specific learner (a learning algorithm and its hyperparameters), minimising the training effort is a reasonable goal. Specifically, if large amounts of data are available and trainingiscostly,theaimistotrainuntilthesaturationpointisreached. Beingabletodetectorpredictwhetheralearner’sperformancesaturates after a given number of observations or iterations can support making decisions on this. 3. Early Discarding (inmodelselection).Similarly,ifwewanttoselect from various models, we want to stop the evaluation of a candidate when we are sure that it is not competitive to the current best solution. We compare the learner performance to that of another learner instead of its ownperformanceonmoretraininginvestment.Forexample,considerthe situation where the learning curve of an algorithm seems to approach the saturation point, and we have already seen a superior model before, of which it is unlikely that the current algorithm will improve over. In this case, we can discard the performance of this learner based on the performance in relation to other models. There is a large methodological overlap in creating a decision basis among all these decision-making situations. For example, whether more data points would be helpful to improve performance is related to the question of the trainingsizethatshouldbechosentominimisetrainingeffort.Bothquestions, at their core, ask for the saturation point of the learning curve. In the following sections, we will discuss each of the three decision-making situations in more depth. 4.1.1 Quantitative Data Acquisition Quantitative data acquisition focuses on the question of how many training examples should be considered, given that they are all sampled i.i.d. from the same source. Quantitative data acquisition does not consider or pay attention to the possibility of acquiring specific instances, which would be considered in qualitative data acquisition. Qualitative data acquisition is mainly studied in the field of active learning and does not ask whether or how many instances should be acquired but for which instances a label should be acquired. Since active learning undermines the i.i.d. assumption, it generates a different type of learning curve and is not covered in this survey. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 23 Therelevanceoflearningcurvesforquantitativedataacquisitionrisesfrom their ability to give insights into intrinsic properties of the data source as wellasintotherelationshipbetweenthenumberoftrainingexamplesandthe utility ofhavingthatnumberofsamples.Ontheonehand,intrinsicproperties refertotheintrinsicnoiseofthedata(Cortesetal,1994),whichtellsusabout the best possible performance of any learner no matter how much data would be available from the source. If we know that, with the given data, we already achieveaperformanceclosetotheintrinsicnoise,thendataacquisitionshould focus on acquiring additional features instead of new instances. On the other hand, the utility is mainly determined by the cost of acquiring (additional) examples,theperformanceobtainedwithacertainnumberofsamples,andthe costtotrainamodelwithagivennumberofinstances(Last,2007,2009;Weiss andTian,2008).Inthiseconomiccontext,therearemainlyfivequestionsthat can be considered: 1. Possibility.Cantheclassificationperformancebeimprovedbymoredata? 2. Potential. What is the best possible predictive performance given unlimited training observations? 3. Maximization Principle.Byhowmuchcanthepredictiveperformancebe improvedifthereisabudgetforafixednumberofadditionaldatapoints? 4. Minimization Principle. How many instances are necessary to obtain a certain degree of predictive performance? 5. Utility maximization. Which sample size maximises a given utility function? In the context of data acquisition, we typically deal with sample-wise curves. Furthermore,oneisoftennotcommittedtoaparticularlearner;therefore,the performance measure in the above questions is implicitly the best one of a portfolio of learners. That is, one assumes a set of learners that is considered admissibleforthepredictiontaskduetoexternalrestrictions.Ingeneral,dueto the ability to parameterise learners, this set is usually infinite. When referring totheportfolio’sperformanceataspecificanchorpoint,weareinterestedinits best-performing algorithm