for free as a side-product of the training procedure. It is comsat monly used for training neural networks (Bishop, 1995; Goodfellow et al, 2016). On the other hand, it requires restarting and is potentially costly for sample-wise curves. JohnandLangley(1996)defineadynamicsampling approachtodetermine theb forsample-wise curves.Astraightforwardapproachmentionedinthat sat paper is to observe whether the performance has become worse on the last sampledanchor.Ifso,onemightconsidergatheringempiricalevidencethatthe saturation point has been exceeded, i.e., it should be somewhere between the lasttwoanchors.However,theauthorsarguethatpreliminaryresultsindicate thatthisapproachoftenstopstooearly.Thisismainlycausedbyhighaleatoric uncertainty,whichimpliesnoisyempiricallearningcurves.Ontheotherhand, one could argue that this approach stops far too late because it can require quitesomeiterationsuntil,bychance,theobservedperformanceisworsethan the one of the last iteration. Therefore, John and Langley (1996) propose also a model-based approach to avoid this problem, which we discuss in Sec. 5.2.1. Of course, when having access to such a model, we can query the expected performance and compare it to the performance at the last anchor. Provostetal(1999)addressthestabilityissuesandalso(someof)theefficiency issues of the above trivial approach in a scheme they call progressive sampling. Similar to dynamic sampling (John and Langley, 1996), progressive samplinginducesmodelsforeachanchorinthescheduleuntiltheconvergence of the learning curve is detected. There are two main differences between the twoapproaches.First,theauthorsproposetousegeometrical insteadofarithmetic schedules, i.e., a schedule of the form bk instead of bk, where b is a constant and k is the position of an anchor in the schedule. They prove that everygeometricscheduleisasymptoticallyoptimalintermsofruntime;thatis, everysuchschedulehasthesameasymptoticruntimeastheschedulethatevaluatesonlyonb .Thisoptimalityproofonlyholdsintheasymptoticcalculus; sat in practice, there are better and less good geometric schedules. For example, Provost et al (1999) propose a dynamic programming approach (called DP), whichefficientlycomputesthecost-optimalschedulebasedonapriordistribution on b and a given training runtime model. The second difference is that sat Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 40 Learning Curves for Decision Making Provostetal(1999)checkwhetherthesaturationpointhasbeenreachedusing a method called linear regression with local sampling (LRLS), which samples notonlyat butalsocloselyaround anchorstoestimatetheslopeatananchor and stop if the slope is close to zero. The practical benefit of the LRLS scheme is not entirely clear for sample-wise curves. First, since the slope is also based on empirical values, fromatheoreticalviewpoint,itisnotclearthatthecriterionisnecessarilybetter than the naive approach suggested by John and Langley (1996). Second, the approach is more expensive than the naive approach because more observationsneedtobesampled;thiscanbeasubstantialfactor,especiallyforlarge anchors. LRLS becomes relevant when applied to learners that have a computationalcomplexityfortrainingthatscalesworsethanlinearinthenumberof training points (e.g., Gaussian processes or decision trees). For learners with trainingcomplexitylinearinthenumberofobservations,itwilloftenbemore expensive than evaluating a learner’s performance on the complete dataset. This can be seen with a simple calculation, in which we assume roughly linear training time complexity: Suppose a costly anchor at 40% of the overall data size.Ifwedrawonlytwoadditionalsamplesaroundthisanchor,thentheruntime is around 120% of the runtime we would have had if we had trained on the complete dataset once. While Provost et al (1999) argue that LRLS only adds a constant factor to the runtime, Sarkar et al (2015) reasonably argue that this factor is often prohibitive in practice. The approaches in this section explicitly assume that more data than b sat is available. This implies that they can be used primarily for early stopping scenarios rather than data acquisition scenarios. Still, if a learner does not attain saturation performance on the complete dataset, the approaches can detect this at the cost of the additional evaluations at the non-final anchors. Concerning the stability of estimates, Beleites et al (2013) point out the necessity to have an estimate for the confidence interval not only for the performance at the anchors in the training schedule but also on the test data. They argue that confidence intervals are essential when deciding whether reasonable generalisation statements can be made for a classifier. This changes the notion of the stopping point to, perhaps, a confident stopping point. The optimalstoppingpointmaybereachedearly,butthevalidationfoldsizesmay still be too small to assure stable assertions. Typically, the confidence intervals are large on small anchors and then contract for increasing anchor sizes. Based on credible intervals, the authors propose choosing the anchor point that achieves a sufficiently narrow interval on the test data. Ng and Dash (2006) address the impact of class imbalance on the performance of a learner. That approach hypothesises that, without further knowledge, the class distribution in which all classes have the same number of observations is optimal. The authors modified the aforementioned progressive samplingschemebycreatingtrainsetsateachanchorsuchthatallclasseshave the same distribution. For anchors of sizes that would require more instances ofaclassthanareavailableintheexistingdata,randominstancesofthatclass Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 41 are replicated until the class balance is established again. Note that while the workisbasedonthefindingsbyWeissandProvost(2003)(cf.Sec.2.5.2),they apply a different strategy. Instead of optimising over the class distribution for agivenanchorsize,theytrytofindthestoppingpointunderthepremisethat the training set will always be balanced. Regardingthestoppingpointofiteration-wise curves,acommontechnique is to separate some data that is not used for training but to compute an iteration-wise curve online to detect convergence (Bishop, 1995). Projective Approaches A different idea to obtain the saturation point b was proposed by Leite and sat Brazdil (2003, 2004) through the notion of metalearning (Brazdil et al, 2022). SimilartoProvostetal(1999),ageometricscheduleisused.Theassumptionis thatwealreadyknowtheperformancesofthecurrentlearneratallanchorsin the schedule on other datasets. The idea is to compute, on the target dataset, theperformancesonlyfortheveryfirstanchorsandthentopredict thesaturation point