Curve stream curve sampleoptimized curve budget Fig. 7: Capacity curve example for a learner class whose complexity can be increased (e.g., a neural network), once for a fixed and finite dataset size and once for the theoretical case of an infinite dataset size. will converge towards the intrinsic noise of the data. That is, no learner can improve over that performance. 2.5.6 Curriculum Learning Curriculumlearningisaparadigminspiredbyhumanlearningstrategies,particularlyhowhumanslearncomplextasksbygraduallyincreasingthedifficulty of the examples they are exposed to (Wang et al, 2022). Incurriculumlearning,insteadofrandomlypresentingtraininginstancesto themodel,instancesarepresentedinameaningfulorder,typicallyfromsimpler tomorecomplexsetsoftraininginstances.Thiscanhelpthemodellearnmore effectivelyandconvergefasterbyinitiallyfocusingoneasierinstancesthatare simpler to learn and gradually introducing more difficult instances. Learningcurvesrelatedtocurriculumlearningcomewithallsortsofnovel challenges, such as interpreting the learning curve in case more complex test instances are provided. Therefore, it is hard to make assumptions about what a well-behaved curriculum learning curve would look like. For this reason, we consider curriculum learning to be out of scope. 3 Modelling a Learning Curve Alearningcurvemodel isacharacterisationofthetrue learningcurvederived from an empirical learning curve. The empirical learning curve is the result of sampling from a stochastic process that underlies noise stemming from randomness in data splits and the learning algorithm itself. It is typically assumed(Domhanetal,2015;Figueroaetal,2012;Kleinetal,2017a,b;Mohr andvanRijn,2023;Swerskyetal,2014)that,foranylearnera andanybudget b N, this stochastic process follows the distribution ∈ f(a,b) (µ ,σ2 )=µ + (0,σ2 ), (5) ∼N a,b a,b a,b N a,b where µ is either (a,b) as per Eq. (2) if modelling a sample-wise curve or a,b C (a,n,b) for some (implicit and not further specified) training set size n as C per Eq. (3) when modelling an iteration-wise curve. It assumes a noise that follows a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and dispersion σ2 that may a,b Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template Learning Curves for Decision Making 17 vary over different anchor sizes. The assumption of a Gaussian noise is reasonable, because most loss functions form an average over sample-wise scores, which implies a Gaussian distribution through the Central Limit Theorem. Forsimplicity,wewillnotmakeadifferencebetweenthetwotypesoflearning curves,sothatanchorsarealwaysdenotedasbudgetsb (regardlessofwhether this refers to training set size or iterations, epochs, trees, etc.). The task of forming a learning curve model for one or multiple learners is inherently one of supervised machine learning and requires the ability to generaliseacrossanchors(andpossiblyevenlearners).Inpractice,observations are only available for a finite number of learner-anchor combinations O = (a ,b ),(a ,b ),(a ,b ),... , and the task is to learn, for each learner a, a 1 1 2 2 3 3 { } modelˆf (b) that expresses the belief about f(a,b) for any budget b, not only a those in O. Therefore, it is not enough to simply create an explicit estimate of µ for the anchors (a,b ) O, but some general pattern must be learned. a,bi i ∈ Observe that a here is not a parameter of ˆf (b) since one often does not a generalise across learners. However, some approaches advocate a single model ˆf(a,b) that estimates µ for any learner-budget combination, where a A a,b ∈ and A is the set of all possible learners (Klein et al, 2017a,b; Swersky et al, 2014). Duringthisprocessofbuildingalearningcurvemodel,onegenerallyneeds to cope with two types of uncertainty. First, the aleatoric uncertainty is σ2 , a,b whichisintrinsicandaveragedoutinthetruelearningcurve.Again,thisisthe uncertainty arising from randomness in the learner itself (if applicable) and randomeffectsinthesplits(ormoregeneral:datacollection)whencomputing the empirical learning curve. Second, the epistemic uncertainty is the one the learningcurvemodelitself hasabouttheestimateofthemeanvalueµ .This a,b uncertainty can be removed by gathering more observations (i.e., extending observation set O). It is important to understand that epistemic uncertainty generally does notindicatemodelquality.Epistemicuncertaintyisnotrelatedtocorrectness: A model can have no epistemic uncertainty (be absolutely sure) about an actuallywrongprediction,andsimilarly,itcanbeuncertainaboutaprediction that is actually correct. Also, epistemic uncertainty gives no indication about whethertheclass fromwhichthepredictivemodelisinferredissuitableforthe task, i.e., whether the true curve can be captured by the model that is fitted (e.g., a power law). Hu¨llermeier and Waegeman (2021) discuss this for the more general case of selecting an appropriate machine learning model. Recent resultssuggestthatmanylearningcurvesarenotadequatelycapturedevenby a very flexible parametric model, i.e., the 4-parameter MMF model (Kielh¨ofer et al, 2024), which motivates other, possibly non-parametric approaches for modelling,suchastheoneusedinfreeze-thawBayesianoptimisation(Swersky et al, 2014). Therefore, the uncertainty at the meta-level about whether a model class is suitable for a task cannot be captured in epistemic uncertainty and must be studied independently. Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template 18 Learning Curves for Decision Making Modellinguncertaintyinlearningcurvemodelstypicallyimpliesmodelling theepistemicuncertainty aboutthecurvemeanµ .Thisuncertaintyrefersto a,b arbitrary anchorsb,boththosefromtheobserveddataO aswellastheanchors that were not part of this. The three common patterns to define beliefs about µ are (i) point estimates (no uncertainty is expressed), (ii) range estimates, a,b e.g.,confidenceintervalsforµ ,or(iii)distributionestimates,whichquantify a,b a full belief model over the true value of µ . The aleatoric uncertainty can a,b also be quantified and modelled, e.g., by taking many different samples per anchor. Fig. 8 illustrates all of these concepts together. The blue line µ reprea, · sents the true learning curve as per Eq. 2 or Eq. 3 for all possible values of b. As this integrates out all possible data splits as well as random factors from the algorithm, each