)+ 1 2 1 2 1 C(T )+ ... 2 Example 3 An atom list(1,list(0,(cid:15))) which represents a list [1, 0] has a cognitive cost C(list(1,list(0,(cid:15))))=5. Example 4 An atom merger(State1,State2) with variables State1 and State2 has a cognitive cost C(merger(State1,State2))=3. In the event of a query q, an execution stack resembles the mental computation and represents the memory of grounded logic terms and atoms instantiated. Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 15 Definition 11 (Execution stack of a datalog program, S(P,l,q)): Given a query q and a non-negative integer l, the execution stack S(P,l,q) of a datalog program P is a finite set of size l of atoms or terms evaluated during the execution of P to compute an answer for q. An evaluation in which an answer to the query is found ends with value >, and an evaluation in which no answer to the query is found ends with ⊥. The cognitive cost represents the tax of memorising goals in the human shortterm memory. The effort of maintaining goals in working memory correlates to the performance of human problem-solving [24]. The complexity of executing a set of rules is estimated by the sum of the cognitive cost of logic terms and atoms in the execution stack. The depth bound of an execution stack denotes the limitation of working memory and ensures the computation of the sum of cognitive costs halts. Definition 12 (Cognitive cost of a datalog program, Cog(P,q)): Given a query q, a non-negative integer l, the cognitive cost of a datalog program P is X Cog(P,q)= C(t) t∈S(P,l,q) Example 5 The program merger/2 in Table 1 takes two input Lt_expr expressions in the expression list of a world state and produces an expression Lt_expr in the memory of the output world state. The output expression contains integers of increasing magnitude from left to right connected by the “<” symbol. Given ex = list(1,list(0,(cid:15))), lb = (cid:15), rb = (cid:15) and m = (cid:15), s = tuple(ex , tuple(0, 1 1 1 1 1 1 tuple(lb ,tuple(rb ,m )))) denotes the initial world state and C(s ) = 13. Let ex 1 1 1 1 2 = list((cid:15), (cid:15)), lb = list(1,(cid:15)), rb = list(0, (cid:15)) and m = (cid:15). s = tuple(ex , tuple(0, 2 2 2 2 2 tuple(lb ,tuple(rb ,m ))))denotestheworldstateafterexecutingparse_expr/2and 2 2 2 C(s ) = 15. parse_expr/2 takes two expressions from the expression list and puts 2 oneexpressionintotheleftbagandputstheotherintotherightbag.LetV andV be 1 2 variables.ThelengthoftheexecutionstackdenotedbyS(merger,4,merger(s1,V )) 1 is4.Thecognitivecostofexecutingmerger/2giventhequerymerger(s ,V )is60. 1 1 S(merger,4,merger(s1,V1)) C(T) merger(s1,V1) 15 parse_expr(s1,V2) 15 parse_expr(s1,s2) 29 ⊥ 1 Cog(merger,merger(s1,V1)) 60 In human problem solving, the role of background knowledge is to facilitate the transferofexistingsolutions[8,70]tothecurrentcontext.Inthecasethatauxiliary knowledge is absent, the construction of the solution relies on lower-level sub-goals andperformanceislimitedbyhumanoperationalerror.Aprimitiveproblemsolution thusdenotesaprogramthatinvolvestheminimumamountofbackgroundknowledge of the task. Definition 13 (Minimum primitive solution program, M¯(φ,E)):Givenaset ofprimitivesφandexamplesE,adatalogprogramlearnedfromexamplesE usinga symbolicmachinelearningalgorithmM¯ andasetofprimitivesφ0 ⊆φisaminimum 16 LunAietal. primitive solution program M¯(φ,E) if and only if for all sets of primitives φ00 ⊆ φ where|φ00|<|φ0|andforallsymbolicmachinelearningalgorithmM0 usingφ00,there exists no machine-learned program M0(E) that is consistent with examples E. Definition 14 (Cognitivecostofaproblemsolution,CogP(E,M¯,φ,q)):Given examplesE,primitivesetφ,aqueryqandasymbolicmachinelearningalgorithmM¯ thatlearnsaminimumprimitivesolution,thecognitivecostofaproblemsolutionis CogP(E,M¯,φ,q)=Cog(M¯(φ,E),q) where M¯(φ,E) is a minimum primitive solution program. The presence of informative knowledge enables efficient problem-solving as projections from background knowledge and allows shortcuts in the construction of the current solution process. In comparison with a primitive problem solution, executional shortcuts in a non-primitive solution could lead to less cognitive load on workingmemoryandfewerperformanceerrorsduringtheexecutionofthesolution. 3.5 Conjectures of human comprehension DonaldMichie[58]discussedtheeffectoftherepresentationalandexecutionalcostof aprogramonhumanunderstanding.Hedescribedthenotionofahumanwindowin termsofaclassofprogramswiththerightbalanceofstorageandcomputationalcomplexity that are fit for human understanding. The cognitive window framework [2] sharesMichie’sviewofthehumanwindowanddescribestwoconstraintsofmachinelearnedtheoryinregardtoitseffectsonhumancomprehension.Thefirstconstraint relates to the size of the hypothesis space associated with the representation of a machine-learned logic theory. This constraint specifies the limitation of human search in the hypothesis space. Conjecture 1 (Cognitive bound on the hypothesis space size, B(P,H)):Consider a symbolic machine-learned datalog program P using p predicate symbols and m meta-rules each having at most j body literals. Given a group of humans H, B(P,H) is a population-dependent bound on the size of hypothesis space such that at most n clauses in P can be comprehended by all humans in H and B(P,H) = mnp(1+j)n. TheconjectureofthehumansearchablehypothesisspacesizeB(P,H)relatesto the MIL complexity analysis in [28,53]. The authors in [2] demonstrated empirical evidence which supports Conjecture 1. Humans learned can only learn some of the rulesforatwo-playerssimplegamewhenthedescriptivesizeoftherulesishigh.This implies that the hypothesis space associated with the program class is too large for acompletesearchandimposesahighcognitiveloadonworkingmemory.Sinceonly a fraction of the original rules is learned, problem solutions which produce action sequences are not complete and errors become more likely to occur. The cognitive window conjecture describes that a machine-learned theory has a harmful explanatory effect on comprehension when learning requires a search in a hypothesis space that is too large for working memory to manage. In addition, a machine-learnedtheoryhasnobeneficialexplanatoryeffectifitscognitivecomplexity in executing explained knowledge is not lower than the cognitive complexity of a solution that uses less auxiliary knowledge. Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 17