in the MaRs-IB pre-test based on Section 5.1. The experiment would start with a participation consent followed by the MaRs-IB pre-test and an introduction to the task background. Participants were advised prior to the beginning of the experiment on the approximate length of the experiment and the requirements. Participants were informed that if they have colour-vision deficiency, they should not participate in the study. Inordertogaininformationaboutparticipants’experiencerelatingtoprogrammingandsortingalgorithms,weadditionallyaskedparticipantstofilloutthefollowing questions after the completion of all performance tests: 1) whether participants have a degree in computer science or a certificate in programming, 2) if they have studiedorarelearningsortingalgorithmsinschooland3)whethertheyknoworhave appliedanysortingalgorithmswhilebeingpresentedwithalistofsortingalgorithms (two of which are distracting choices and do not exist). Task-related information was presented via the interface throughout the experiment.Allgroupsreceivedaperformancetestofsortinglast.Thisexperimentdesign ensured all groups experienced the same amount of training and performance tests respecting the curriculum order. In merge training, participants first answered the displayed question illustrated by Figure 3 and were taken to the next page where feedback and explanations were presented. In Figure 4, explanations are presented in two rows which demonstrate the correct and the wrong action sequences. The format in which participants were askedtoinputtheirresponsesisthesameinthemergeperformancetest,sorttraining and sort performance test. When providing a sequence response, participants were requiredtoinputlabelsrepresentingthefruitsequencethattheybelievedtohaveincreasingweightsfromlefttoright.AnotherrobotinstructorBobhelpedparticipants learn to operate the machine “purple diamond” to sort fruits. Inthesorttrainingandperformancetest,participantsshouldputfruitsintoshippingboxesbyenteringfruitlabelsintoasequenceoftextboxes.Inthesorttraining (Figure 5), participants were informed of the number of comparisons their robot instructor Bob made to sort the input sequences. Participants were asked to sort the sameinputsequencesandencouragedtousefewercomparisons.Theintentionofthis competition was to provide an incentive for participants to consciously think about how to revise their strategy in order to improve sorting efficiency. This information was accessible by participants in all groups during the sort training. In the sorting sections, participants were also provided with the balance scale instrument. Participants were encouraged to take two sessions of one-minute rest, one after theMaRs-IBpre-testandonepriortothefinalperformancetestofsorting.Thebreak sessions allowed participants to recharge and regain attention to perform tasks in later stages. The progress bar at the top of the interface showed the percentage of materials that the participants had completed with respect to all materials in the experiment. Participants could use the progress bar to estimate the time that they wouldneedtofinishtheexperimentwithintheallocatedsession.Foralltrainingand performance test sections, we recorded response time, answers and the comparisons made for analysis. The final section included four reflective questions. We asked participantswhethertheyunderstoodtheconnectionbetweenthetwotasksorused what they learned in one task for the other task. We also checked their background in programming and sorting algorithms in the survey at the end of the experiment. Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 31 (a)Meanmergeperformancetestscoresand (b) Mean sort performance test scores and standarderrors. standarderrors. Fig.7:Performancetestscores(PS)offourgroups,Group1(MS/WEX)Group2 (MS/WOEX), Group 3 (SM/WEX) and Group 4 (SM/WOEX) with standard errors. Across the x-axis in (a), data points indicate the change in the mean merge performancescoreasaresultoflearningwithexplanations.In(b),theredlineshows the mean sort performance score when participants learned with explanations and the blue line represents the mean sort performance score when participants learned without explanations. Across the x-axis in (b), data points show the change in the mean sort performance score as a result of altering the curriculum arrangement. 5.4 Results Prior to the experiment, we conducted two experimental trials with one sample of studentsfromtheUniversityofBambergandanotherstudentsamplefromImperial CollegeLondon.Thetrialstudiesprovidedadditionalinsightsintotheinterfaceand helped us revise the experimental design. However, due to the limited scale of the trials,wewerenotabletoobserveanymeaningfuloutcome.Weproceededtorecruit alargersampleof124mixed-backgroundparticipantsfromAmazonMechanicalTurk (AMT).These124participantsfromAMTwererandomisedandassignedtothefour groups. A partition of 79 participants was created based on the MaRs-IB test and those included had a test accuracy within one standard deviation (σ =.169) of the mean (µ = .654). Demographically, this partition had a lower male-to-female ratio (36to42,oneoptedout),mostparticipantswerebetween25to54inage(61of79) and almost all had a college degree or higher (67 of 79). Analysis of task performance We focused on this AMT sample partition and employed a quantitative approach to test hypotheses H1 to H5. The AMT partition had an even distribution of participants in the four groups, Group 1 (MS and WEX, n = 20), Group 2 (MS and WOEX, n = 20), Group 3 (SM and WEX, n = 20) and Group 4 (SM and WOEX, n = 19). Figure 7a and Figure 7b present the mean performance score 32 LunAietal. Table 8: Mean strategy frequency in sort training and sort performance test. Each human sorting trace in the sort training and sort performance test was matched to one of the following categories of sorting algorithms, bubble sort (BS), dictionary sort (DS), insertion sort (IS), merge sort (MS), quick sort (QS), a combination of insertion and dictionary sort (Hybrid) and unclassified (Other). The number of humansortingtracesineachcategorywasaveragedbythetotalnumberoftraces.We highlightpositivedifferencesgreaterthan.05ingreyandinboldfont.Ineachgroup, the highlighted difference is the largest increase in algorithm application frequency from sort training to sort performance test. Categories BS DS IS MS QS Hybrid Other PS Group 1 (MS/WEX) – – – – – – – Training .012 .075 .150 .000 .175 .162 .425 Performancetest .056 .094 .162 .025 .238 .175 .250 Differences .044 .019 .012 .025 .063 .013 -.175 Group 2 (MS/WOEX) – – – – – – – Training .000 .062 .162 .025 .162 .225 .362 Performancetest