sequential teachingcurriculumreflectsthedegreetowhichhumancomprehensionofaconcept is affected by a curriculum. Given two sequential teaching curricula and a concept of interest, the effect of one curriculum over another curriculum corresponds to the difference in comprehension measurements of the concept. A significant difference in human comprehension as a result of learning from one curriculum over another curriculum can be classified as a beneficial or harmful effect of learning from the former curriculum. Definition 9 (Beneficial/harmful effect of a sequential teaching curriculum): Given that C = C (ST(Ds, Es, λ , Ms), H) and C = C (ST(Ds, 1 seq 1 2 seq Es, λ , Ms), H) are sequential teaching curricula where Ds is a set of n pred2 icate definitions and D ∈ Ds is a predicate definition, Es are sets of examples, λ ,λ :Ds×Es×Ms→N are two rank functions, Ms is a set of machine learning 1 2 algorithms, and H is a human group, the curriculum C in comparison with the 1 curriculum C is 2 – beneficial to H on D if E (C ,C ,D)>0 seq 1 2 – harmful to H on D if E (C ,C ,D)<0 seq 1 2 – Otherwise there is no effect on H for D in curriculum C compared with cur1 riculum C 2 The effect on the predicate D is beneficial when the curriculum ordered by λ 1 resultsinabettercomprehensionofDthanthecomprehensionofDinthecurriculum ordered by λ . Conversely, the effect on D is harmful in the case that significant 2 degradation of comprehension is observed when comparing the comprehension of D between curricula described by λ and λ . As with the effect of a machine-learned 1 2 theory (Definition 4), whether or not an effect of a sequential teaching curriculum is significantly beneficial or harmful can be determined using an independent twosample t-test or similar method. 3.4 Cognitive cost of a logic program Aconsensusbetweentheliteratureoncognitivepsychologyandartificialintelligence [61,45,69] is that the information processing of humans in working memory can be modelled by manipulation of symbols in machines which can be formally captured by Turing machines. The limitation on working memory capacity corresponds to a boundedtapelengthandinstructioncomplexityinTuringMachines.Forrule-based concept acquisition [21], human concept attainment is analogical to a search in a collection of hypotheses guided by some preference ordering which is comparable to versionspacelearninginmachinelearning[64].Inaddition,theorganisationofcomplex action sequences into hierarchical structures in human information processing 14 LunAietal. is an efficient mechanism for general problem-solving. In the contexts of analogical problem-solving[23]andproductionsystems[69],top-levelgoalsaredecomposedinto sub-goals which can be described by a set of rules that guide actions in problemsolving sequences. Although rules generally can be considered as procedural knowledge, in complex domains human verbalisation of rules utilises declarative memory [7,81]. The explicit representations of a human problem-solving solution correspond to rule-like descriptions. For the following definitions, we assume that: – Humanlearnersareversionspacelearnerswhocanmakeonlylimitedhypothesis space searches – Human learning is guided by meta-rules which construct the sub-goal structure and uses predicates as background knowledge – An increase in the execution complexity of the problem solution can have a negative effect on performance – Rules can be declaratively represented in a verbalisable form whose complexity can be measured by the Kolmogorov complexity ThecognitivecostisavariantofKolmogorovcomplexity[49]proposedin[2].The cognitivecostestimatesthetextualcomplexityoflogictermsandatomsdeclaredin the execution stack of working memory. These logic terms and atoms are instances of predicates in a datalog program during the execution of a goal. A datalog program is a declarative subset of logic programs that represent data structures using predicate arguments but do not use function symbols. Given logic terms and atoms T ,T ,...,T ,T , a tuple of finite arity can represented as 1 2 n−1 n tuple(T ,tuple(T ,tuple(...,tuple(T ,tuple(T ,(cid:15)))...))) 1 2 n−1 n Similarly, a list of finite size can be represented as list(T ,list(T ,list(...,list(T ,list(T ,(cid:15)))...))) 1 2 n−1 n where(cid:15)denotesanemptycharacter.Thecostoflogictermsandatomsiscomputed based on the length of the representation, in particular, the number of symbols involved. Definition 10 (Cognitive cost of a logic term and atom, C(T)): Given T a logic term or atom, the cost of C(T) can be computed as follows: – C(>)=C(⊥)=1 – A variable V has cost C(V)=1 – A constant c of a finite length has cost C(c) which is the number of digits and characters in c – An atom Q(T ,T ,...) of a finite arity has cost C(Q(T ,T ,...)) = 1+C(T )+ 1 2 1 2 1 C(T )+ ... 2 Example 3 An atom list(1,list(0,(cid:15))) which represents a list [1, 0] has a cognitive cost C(list(1,list(0,(cid:15))))=5. Example 4 An atom merger(State1,State2) with variables State1 and State2 has a cognitive cost C(merger(State1,State2))=3. In the event of a query q, an execution stack resembles the mental computation and represents the memory of grounded logic terms and atoms instantiated. Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 15 Definition 11 (Execution stack of a datalog program, S(P,l,q)): Given a query q and a non-negative integer l, the execution stack S(P,l,q) of a datalog program P is a finite set of