In merger/2, two Lt_expr O from exprs are first parsed into left_bag and right_bag. Then numbers are compared pair-wise from two bags and the smaller number is appended to the last Lt_expr in memory. sorter/2 applies merger/2 over all Lt_expr in exprs. Constructed Lt_expr in memory are recycled back to exprs by recycle_memory/2. This process is iterated until there is only one Lt_expr left in exprs and memory is empty. We define a cost function for compare_nums/2 such that the energy is incrementedbyonewhenevertwonumbersaresuccessfullycompared.Weadditionally define a constraint over the world states. This constraint based on Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient [87] ensures the expressions in the current state are not less sorted compared with expressions in the immediate next state. 3.3 Explanatory effect of curriculum order We have employed a quantifiable approach that provides operational definitions for the evaluation of the effect of sequential teaching on human comprehension. This allows us to better account for the context, results and limitations. We describe the 10 LunAietal. Table 3: A summary of the connections between definitions of comprehensibility, explanatory effects and cognitive window in [66,2] and the proposed framework to account for effects of sequential teaching curricula. Definitionsand Extendeddefinitionsand Framework resultsinpreviousworks resultsforsequentialteaching Comprehensibility Definitions1and2 Definitions5to7 Explanatoryeffects Definitions3and4 Definitions8and9 Cognitivewindow Definitions10to14,Remark1 Conjecture3 andConjecture1to2 basis of our framework by referring to previous work on comprehensibility [82] and explanatory effects [2] (Table 3). Then we define a sequential teaching curriculum anditsrelativeeffectivenesswithrespecttoanothersequentialteachingcurriculum. Based on an operable definition of comprehensibility [82], the authors in [2] explored the explanatory effects of machine-learned logic rules on human comprehension and proposed a framework of a cognitive window that focuses on the symbolic subsetofmachinelearning.Thedefinitionsofcomprehensibilityandexplanatoryeffects are extended in this present work to account for sequential teaching curricula inthecontextofsymbolicmachinelearning.Weusethelogicprogramslearnedfrom Metagol to generate explanations for our human trial. For the purpose of experiO mentation, we only consider curricula with noise-free training examples. This does not mean, however, that the proposed definitions could not be extended outside of the considered scope. Theoperationaldefinitionofcomprehensibility[82]isanobjectivemeansofevaluatinghumancomprehensionofaconceptbasedonhumanout-of-samplepredictive accuracy. It was extended in [2] to define the explanatory effectiveness of machinelearned logic programs which measures the extent to which examples with explanations generated from machine-learned logic programs can be simulated by humans. Definition 1 (Unaided human comprehension of examples, C (D, H, E)) h Given that D is a logic program representing the definition of a target predicate, H is a human group and E is a set of examples of the target predicate. The unaided human comprehension of examples E is the mean accuracy with which a human h ∈ H after a brief study of E and without further sight can classify new material sampled randomly from the domain of D. Compared with the unaided human comprehension of examples, the machineexplained human comprehension of examples corresponds to the out-of-sample classification accuracy after studying the machine-learned explanation M(E) where M is a machine learning algorithm and E is a set of training examples. Definition 2 (Machine-explainedhumancomprehensionofexamples,C ( ex D,H,M(E))):GiventhatDisalogicprogramrepresentingthedefinitionofatarget predicate, H is a human group, M(E) is a theory learned using machine learning Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 11 algorithm M and E is a set of examples of the target predicate. The machineexplained human comprehension of examples E is the mean accuracy with which a human h ∈ H after a brief study of an explanation based on M(E) and without further sight can classify new material sampled randomly from the domain of D. The explanatory effect of a machine-learned theory on human comprehension of a task is defined as the difference between machine-explain and unaided human comprehension of examples of the task. Definition 3 (Explanatory effect of a machine-learned theory, E (D, H, ex M(E))): Given a logic program D representing the definition of a target predicate, a human group H and a machine learning algorithm M, the explanatory effect of the theory M(E) learned from examples E is E (D,H,M(E))=C (D,H,M(E))−C (D,H,E) ex ex h Inthecasethattheexplanationsprovidedbythemachineleadtoapositiveimprovement,theexplanatoryeffectofthelearnedtheoryisbeneficialtohumancomprehension.Whenthisdifferenceisnegative,theexplanatoryeffectofthemachine-learned theory is harmful to human comprehension. Definition 4 (Beneficial/harmfuleffectofamachine-learnedtheory):Given a logic program D representing the definition of a target predicate, a set of training examples E, a group of humans H, and a symbolic machine learning algorithm M: – M(E) learned from E is beneficial to H if E (D,H,M(E))>0 ex – M(E) learned from E is harmful to H if E (D,H,M(E))<0 ex – Otherwise, M(E) learned from E does not have an effect on H Whether or not an explanatory effect is significantly beneficial or harmful can be determined empirically by applying an independent two-sample t-test or similar method to the means of unaided- and machine-explained human comprehension. In thecasethatthemeandifferenceisnotsignificant,wecannotclassifytheeffectofa machine-learned theory as either beneficial or harmful. The definitions of human comprehension and explanatory effects are extended to account for the ordering of concepts. We define a sequential teaching curriculum to contain a set of concept definitions, sets of examples and explanations. The arrangementofconceptsinacurriculumcanbedecidedbasedonanorderingfunction which