the input fruit sequence by using a mouse to drag and drop fruits. The labels and fruits wereintentionallyrandomisedbeforethe experimentsothatparticipantswouldnot receivethewrongimpression thatthesequence had been already alphabetically ordered. 28 LunAietal. eachofthequestionsequences,wemadesurethatitwasnottrivialandrequiredan appropriate level of computational effort for a machine program to sort. A question in the merge training and performance test involved two sub-sequences of similar sizes as inputs and the length of each sub-sequence ranged from 1 to 4. Inthesorttrainingandperformancetest,aquestionconsistsofafruitsequence and the length of sequences varied from 6 to 10. In the pilot trials, we identified a higher usage of the insertion sort algorithm. For generating sort training and testing questions, we made an adjustment to include sequences that would lead to an advantage in the number of comparisons made when applying the merge sort algorithmovertheinsertionsortalgorithm.Thischangewouldallowroomforpeople to optimise their sorting strategy instead of adhering to what they already knew. The sequences in performance tests are different from those in the training stages but they share similar patterns. Problem setup To make the experiment more engaging, we introduced the task background where each participant was asked to help two robots, Alice and Bob, perform tasks in two warehouses.Eachrobotwasresponsibleforadistincttaskandprovidedinformation about the associated task to the participant. The robot Alice was designed to teach merging while the other one Bob taught participants how to sort. To evoke an understanding of the connection between merging and sorting, at the beginning of the experiment, participants were explicitly reminded with a note of the link between task materials taught by two robots and were encouraged to pay attention to the connection. Tolearnmerging,participantswereaskedtolearnfromtherobotAliceandhelp it operate a special machine to arrange fruits on a conveyor belt. In Figure 3, fruits labelled with A, B, C and D were inputs to a machine called the “blue star” that representedthemergingoperation.Eachquestioninthesectionsrelatedtomerging asked the participant to merge two sequences of fruits. The balance scale to the left of the interface page (Figure 3, 4 and 5) allowed participantstocomparetheweightsoffruitsbyenteringtwofruits’alphabeticlabels on both sides of the balance. Participants were presented with instructions to use the balance scale. The balance would tilt to the side of the fruit that is heavier. A piece of text would be shown to further clarify the result of comparing two fruits. Participants were provided with the information that the two input sequences of fruits in the questions had increasing weights from left to right. Two output answer choicesdifferedinthefruitsthatwerehighlightedwiththeyellowcolour.Participants were asked to select from one of the two output answer choices that had the fruits in the correct order. Feedback was presented as shown by Figure 4 on whether the participant’s selection was correct. Based on the same initial problem state, this feedback provides apairofpositiveandnegativeexampleswhichhelpscontrastthecorrectandwrong sequence of decision-making. The white blocks on the right-hand-side of Figure 4 contain textual and graphical explanations that instantiate the logic rules learned by Metagol in Table 1. Groups without machine-learned explanations would only O see blank white boxes with no textual and graphical explanations during the merge training stage of the experiment. Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 29 Table 7: Group 1 learned merging before learning sorting and was provided with visualandtextualexplanationsofmergingbasedonmachine-learnedrules.Group2 receivedthesamecurriculumasGroup1butwithoutexplanations.Theparticipants in Group 3 learned sorting prior to learning merging with explanations in the same format as received by Group 1. Group 4 did not get explanations. EX WEX WOEX CO MS Group1(MS/WEX) Group2(MS/WOEX) SM Group3(SM/WEX) Group4(SM/WOEX) 5.3 Method and design The experiment2 was implemented based on a four-group factorial 2×2 design to accountforallcombinations(Table7)ofthetwoindependentexperimentalvariables, the curriculum order (CO) and the presentation of explanations (EX). Figure 6 shows two curriculum orders. In the curriculum shown by Figure 6a, participants received training material on merging first. In the reverse curriculum demonstrated by Figure 6b, subjects were trained on sorting first. Fig. 6: In setup (a), participants learned merging before learning sorting (MS). In setup (b), participants learned sorting before learning merging (SM). Participants were not allowed to repeat the experiment. Every participant was assignedtoonegroupandwentthroughtrainingandtestwithnorepeat.Allgroups received the same material of training examples and test questions. The numbers of questionsintheexperimentsectionsmergetraining,mergetesting,sorttrainingand sorttestingwere6,5,4and8respectively.However,thenumbersequencesusedfor merging were different from those used for sorting in order to prevent participants from reusing previous answers. We recorded participants’ basic information such as their age, gender and education after acquiring their consent. This allows us to control the distribution of backgroundinexperimentgroups.Tocontrolparticipants’cognitiveability,wethen 2 Theexperimentinterfaceisavailableonhttps://github.com/LAi1997/sequential-teaching. TheinterfacewascreatedusingPsychoPy[71],anopen-sourcepackageforimplementingfree interfaceswithstimuluspresentationandcontrolinPythonandJavaScript. 30 LunAietal. collected their responses in the MaRs-IB pre-test based on Section 5.1. The experiment would start with a participation consent followed by the MaRs-IB pre-test and an introduction to the task background. Participants were advised prior to the beginning of the experiment on the approximate length of the experiment and the requirements. Participants were informed that if they have colour-vision deficiency, they should not participate in the study. Inordertogaininformationaboutparticipants’experiencerelatingtoprogrammingandsortingalgorithms,weadditionallyaskedparticipantstofilloutthefollowing questions after the completion of all performance tests: 1) whether participants have a degree in computer science or a certificate in programming, 2) if they have studiedorarelearningsortingalgorithmsinschooland3)whethertheyknoworhave appliedanysortingalgorithmswhilebeingpresentedwithalistofsortingalgorithms (two of which are distracting choices and