Machine learning manuscript No. (will be inserted by the editor) Explanatory machine learning for sequential human teaching Lun Ai · Johannes Langer · Stephen H. Muggleton · Ute Schmid Abstract The topic of comprehensibility of machine-learned theories has recently drawnincreasingattention.InductiveLogicProgramming(ILP)useslogicprogrammingtoderivelogictheoriesfromsmalldatabasedonabductionandinductiontechniques. Learned theories are represented in the form of rules as declarative descriptionsofobtainedknowledge.Inearlierwork,theauthorsprovidedthefirstevidenceof ameasurableincreaseinhumancomprehensionbasedonmachine-learnedlogicrules forsimpleclassificationtasks.Inalaterstudy,itwasfoundthatthepresentationof machine-learned explanations to humans can produce both beneficial and harmful effectsinthecontextofgamelearning.Wecontinueourinvestigationofcomprehensibility by examining the effects of the ordering of concept presentations on human comprehension.Inthiswork,weexaminetheexplanatoryeffectsofcurriculumorder andthepresenceofmachine-learnedexplanationsforsequentialproblem-solving.We showthat1)thereexisttasksAandBsuchthatlearningAbeforelearningBresults in better comprehension for humans in comparison to learning B before learning A and2)thereexisttasksAandBsuchthatthepresenceofexplanationswhenlearning A contributes to improved human comprehension when subsequently learning B. We propose a framework for the effects of sequential teaching on comprehension based on an existing definition of comprehensibility and provide evidence for supportfromdatacollectedinhumantrials.Ourempiricalstudyinvolvescurriculathat teach novices the merge sort algorithm. Our results show that sequential teaching of concepts with increasing complexity a) has a beneficial effect on human comprehension and b) leads to human re-discovery of divide-and-conquer problem-solving strategies,andc)allowsadaptationsofhumanproblem-solvingstrategywithbetter performance when machine-learned explanations are also presented. Keywords Explainable artificial intelligence; Machine learning comprehensibility; Meta-interpretive learning; Inductive logic programming. LunAi(cid:0) DepartmentofComputing,ImperialCollegeLondon,London,UK E-mail:lun.ai15@imperial.ac.uk JohannesLanger UniversityofBamberg,Bamberg,Germany E-mail:johannes-miran.langer@stud.uni-bamberg.de StephenH.Muggleton DepartmentofComputing,ImperialCollegeLondon,London,UK E-mail:s.muggleton@imperial.ac.uk UteSchmid CognitiveSystemsGroup,UniversityofBamberg,Bamberg,Germany E-mail:ute.schmid@uni-bamberg.de 3202 raM 62 ]IA.sc[ 2v05201.5022:viXra 2 LunAietal. 1 Introduction Human learning can be described as a concept formation progression in which observations of objects and events are summarised and formulated by some interdependent hierarchical structure [37]. As an example, in the context of teaching algorithms to human students, we may imagine a human teacher using the material in Figure 1 for teaching the merge sort algorithm. In a bottom-up teaching approach with increasing concept complexity, students learn how to merge first (left) and then move on to study sorting (right). In contrast, via a top-down teaching approachwhichpresentsconceptswithdecreasingcomplexity,studentslearntosort first(right)withoutpriorknowledgeofmergingandstudymergingafterwards(left). Itmightbeofinteresttothehumanteachertoquestionwhichapproachyieldshigher student sorting performance and what effects the two teaching approaches have on students’ sorting strategies. Fig. 1: An illustration of teaching materials of merging and sorting that can be learned in incremental order (left to right). All fruits have different weights which can be pairwise compared using the balance scale at the corner. On the left-hand side,twosetsofapplesshouldbemergedintoalargercollectioninincreasingweights from left to right. On the right-hand side, a set of bananas needs to be arranged in increasing weights from left to right. It was stressed by the Machine Learning pioneer Donald Michie [60] that an intelligent machine not only needs to excel humans in performance but should also possess the capacity to effectively interact with and transfer knowledge to humans. An intelligent machine can in this way fulfil an integrated role that contributes to boththe“stock ofsoftware” andthe“stockof knowledge”[60].Owing toincreasing awareness of the importance of explainable AI, reported by comprehensive reviews [1,9,63], a great number of studies have emerged with an emphasis on systems that provide support for human understanding. In addition, there is an increasing emphasisonAIthatinteractstokeephumans“intheloop”[62,79].However,owingto the absence of quantifiable definitions and evaluation procedures, some issues such as ambiguity and lack of empirical evaluations have been highlighted [36,54,62]. At the intersection of these two paradigms is the research area that focuses on the comprehensibility of machine learning. An operational definition of comprehensibility was provided in [82] for examining machine-human teaching interaction. This definition relates human comprehension to the out-of-sample prediction accu- Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 3 racyofhumanlearnersafterstudyingtrainingexamplesandamachine-learnedlogic program. It allowed the first demonstration [66] of Michie’s Ultra-Strong Machine Learning (USML) which stressed the role of teaching machine-learned knowledge to humanssuchthattheirproficiencyonataskcanberaisedtoahigherlevelwithrespect to learning from randomly selected examples. Later results in [2] showed that explanations generated from machine-learned logic programs can have both beneficial and harmful effects on human comprehension and suggested, via a cognitive window framework, that explanatory effects are dependent on both descriptive and executional complexity. Despite the classification of explanatory effectiveness in [2], the effects of the order of concepts in a teaching curriculum on human learning - an essential topic of machine learning and human problem solving that has yet to be exploredforunderstandingthecomprehensibilityofmachine-learnedlogicprograms. Based on established results and teaching procedures in [2,66], in this work, we extend the frameworks of comprehensibility and explanatory effects to account for the impacts of sequential teaching on comprehension. We refer to the cognitive window framework which attributes the explanatory effects to 1) the descriptive complexity of machine-learned rules and 2) the cost of knowledge application with respecttoanexecutionstack.Ahumantrialofsequentialteachingwasconductedto examine the effects of concept ordering in curricula and explanations in the context of learning an efficient sorting strategy. We hypothesise the improvement of human comprehension from sequential teaching as the result of the reduction in the size of the hypothesis space associated with the target concept definition. Our proposed framework is consistent with empirical evidence collected from the human trial involving participants with no background in programming. We summarise the paper’s contributions as follows: – We define a measure to evaluate beneficial/harmful explanatory effects of a sequential teaching curriculum on human comprehension. – Wehypothesisetheimprovementofhumancomprehensionfromsequentialteaching curricula based