Es, λ , Ms), H) denote the human MS/WEX seq MS/WEX comprehension of the sequential teaching curriculum that learns merging before learning sorting with explanations of merging. Let C = C (ST(Ds, Es, MS/WOEX seq λ , Ms), H) denote the human comprehension of the sequential teachMS/WOEX ing curriculum that learns merging before learning sorting without explanations of merging. Let C = C (ST(Ds,Es, λ , Ms), H) denote the huSM/WEX seq SM/WEX man comprehension of the sequential teaching curriculum that learns sorting before learningmergingwithexplanationsofmerging.LetC =C (ST(Ds,Es, SM/WOEX seq λ , Ms), H) denote the human comprehension of the sequential teachSM/WOEX ing curriculum that learns sorting before learning merging without explanations of merging.Wethenintroducehypothesesthatfocusonhowcurriculumorderandexplanationsgeneratedfrommachine-learnedrulesaffecthumanlearningofsorting.In Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 21 Table 6: A summary of experimental independent variables, definitions and results related to each experimental hypothesis. Hypotheses Independentexperimentalvariables Relateddefinitions H1 CO H2 EX Definition5to9,15andConjecture3 H3 COandEX H4 EX Definition1to4,15andConjecture2 H5 EX Definition15 Table6,weshowhowthefollowingexperimentalhypothesesrelatetotheconjectures and our framework. H1: Learning merging before learning sorting leads to a beneficial effect on human comprehension of sorting (E (C , C , sorter) + E ( seq MS/WEX SM/WEX seq C , C , sorter) > 0) with respect to learning sorting before MS/WOEX SM/WOEX learning merging. In H1, we examine whether human learners achieve better sorting performance from the curriculum with increasing concept complexity (MS) than from the curriculum with decreasing concept complexity (SM). H2: Learning merging with explanations results in a beneficial explanatory effect on human comprehension of sorting (E (C , C ,sorter) + seq MS/WEX MS/WOEX E (C , C ,sorter) > 0) with respect to learning merging seq SM/WEX SM/WOEX without explanations. In H2, we assess if learning merging with aids in the form of explanations constructed from machine-learned rules (WEX) improves sorting performance compared with learning merging without explanations (WOEX). H3:Learningmergingwithexplanationsfurtherincreasesthebeneficialeffectofcurriculumorderonhumancomprehensionofsorting(E (C ,C , seq MS/WEX MS/WOEX sorter) - E (C , C , sorter) > 0) with respect to learning seq SM/WEX SM/WOEX merging without explanations. InH3,weinspectifthereisaninteractioneffectbetweencurriculumorder(CO) and explanations (EX) on sorting performance. We suspect that for human learners who have no previous programming experience,learningmerginginthepresenceofexplanationsresultsinadaptingnewsorting strategiesincomparisonwithlearningmergingintheabsenceofexplanations.Since mergingcanbetaughtinisolationanditdoesnotdependontheknowledgeofsorting in the curricula, we refer to Definition 4 and the cognitive window to account 22 LunAietal. for the effect of explanations on merging. However, owing to Metagol learning a O minimum primitive solution merger/2, we anticipate no beneficial effect on human comprehensionofmergingasaresultoflearningfromexplanations.LetAdenotethe backgroundknowledgeofMetagol containingdefinitionsofprimitiveandcomposO ite actions and X denote questions that the human group H performs in the merge performance test. H4:Learningmergingwithexplanationsgeneratedfromruleswithoutalowcognitive cost (Cog(merger,x) ≥ CogP(E , Metagol , A, x) for all x ∈ X) does merge O notresultinabeneficialexplanatoryeffectonhumancomprehensionofmerging (E (merger, H, merger) ≤0). ex In H4, we examine if learning with explanations of merging (WEX) results in no observable performance difference or worse performance with respect to learning without explanations of merging (WOEX). H5: Learning merging with explanations before learning sorting leads to adaptation of efficient human sorting strategies with better performance. We consider executed comparisons of human participants as problem-solving traces. In Section 5.4, we estimate through human trace analysis the correspondence between human sorting strategies and machine sorting algorithms in training and performance tests. An underlying assumption is that learning a new strategy duringtheperformancetestischallengingwithoutfeedbackandstrategyadaptation iseasierduringthetrainingstage.Inaddition,weassumethatthepresenceofexplanations and the incremental curriculum contribute to efficient and effective human decision-making. Therefore, in H5, we inspect the performance of specific sorting strategies that increase in usage from sort training to sort performance test. 5 Experiments Wefirstdescribetheimplementationofapre-testwhichwasgiventoallparticipants at the beginning of the experiment. In addition, we report the masking and presentation of the sorting task in Section 5.2. In Section 5.3, we explain the setup of the experimentwhichwascarriedoutonacrowdsourcingplatformAmazonMechanical Turk. Results are demonstrated in Section 5.4 which is followed by a discussion of our findings. 5.1 MaRs-IB pre-test We have reason to assume that the participant’s performance in the experimental task varies depending on their cognitive abilities. Recording their cognitive ability provides us with two possibilities: 1. It allows statistical control of the participants’ cognitive ability. 2. Itcanbedeterminedwhetherthemeancognitiveabilityinallexperimentalconditions is the same. If that is the case, mean differences in performance between theconditionscanbeinterpretedwithouthavingtocontrolforeachparticipant’s cognitive ability first. Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 23 Therehavebeentwomajorsuggestionsforrecordingthiscontrol:eitherconfront participants with a version of the experimental task itself or use a short intelligence testintheformofaRavenMatricesshorttest[12]orsimilarmaterial.Wearguethat usingtheexperimentaltaskwillunderminethesequentialnatureofourexperiment, aseithergroupwouldstartwiththelow-complexitytaskorwiththehigh-complexity task. A third option is for each group to start with their respective first task, which would introduce task familiarity effects (the high-complexity-first condition would havecompletedmorehigh-complexitytasksthanthelow-complexity-firstcondition). This approach does not pose a good control since each group would complete a different task. Fig. 2: Each MaRs-IB item consists of an incomplete 3×3 matrix in which 8 cells withshapediconsdepictamodificationruleto(an)abstractshape(s).Thetestasks the participant to fill in the missing piece at the right bottom corner of the 3×3 matrixbychoosingoneoffourprovidedoptions(A,B,CandD).Thecorrectanswer to this example is A. Using an intelligence test avoids interference with the experiment since the test should not influence strategy development in the experimental task in a way that couldbeconsideredtoworkagainstthesequentialorderoftheexperiment.However, theoriginalRavenMatricestestandmanycomparabletestsareexpensiveandcannot bedigitizedduetocopyright.Thematrixreasoningitembank(MaRs-IB)hasneither of these two issues [26], thus