the rulesforatwo-playerssimplegamewhenthedescriptivesizeoftherulesishigh.This implies that the hypothesis space associated with the program class is too large for acompletesearchandimposesahighcognitiveloadonworkingmemory.Sinceonly a fraction of the original rules is learned, problem solutions which produce action sequences are not complete and errors become more likely to occur. The cognitive window conjecture describes that a machine-learned theory has a harmful explanatory effect on comprehension when learning requires a search in a hypothesis space that is too large for working memory to manage. In addition, a machine-learnedtheoryhasnobeneficialexplanatoryeffectifitscognitivecomplexity in executing explained knowledge is not lower than the cognitive complexity of a solution that uses less auxiliary knowledge. Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 17 Conjecture 2 (Cognitive window of a machine-learned theory):Givenalogic program D representing the definition of a target predicate, a machine learning algorithm M, a minimum primitive solution learning algorithm M¯ and examples E, M(E) is a machine-learned theory using the primitive set φ and belongs to the program class with hypothesis space S. For a human group H, E satisfies both ex 1. E (D,H,M(E)) < 0 if |S| > B(M(E),H) ex 2. E (D,H,M(E)) ≤ 0 if Cog(M(E),x) ≥ CogP(E,M¯,φ,x) for all unseen ex query x that h∈H have to perform after study Explanations are only beneficial if they are of appropriate complexity and are not overwhelming nor more cognitively expensive than a primitive solution to the problem.Thiscognitivewindowsuggeststhatcomplexmachine-learnedmodelsand models which cannot provide abstract descriptions are difficult to be comprehended by humans effectively. Remark 1 Metagol isprovidedwithasetofcompositepredicatedefinitionsA = O comp {parse_exprs/2,compare_nums/2,single_expr/2,drop_bag_remaining/2, recycle_memory/2} to learn merger/2 in Table 1. A is constructed from a comp set of primitive action definitions A . The composite actions of breaking numprim ber sequences into individual numbers (parse_exprs/2), comparing two numbers (compare_nums/2)andappendingtwosortedsequences(drop_bag_remaining/2) are sufficient for merging and the respective predicates appear in the learned logic program merger/2. Given action definitions A = A ∪A , since composite prim comp actions A are constructed from multiple primitive actions from A , A comp prim comp is the necessary and sufficient subset of A to learn a definition of merging. This implies that merger/2 learned by Metagol (E) is the minimum primitive solution. O Therefore, given test examples X of merging and sufficient training examples E, Cog(merger, x) = CogP(E, Metagol , A, x) for all x∈X. O The complexity analysis based on the Blumer bound [17] in [29] attributes a sample complexity decrease to the introduction of new predicate symbols to the machine learner. Previously learned predicate definitions extend the background. Reusinglearnedconceptsleadstoadecreaseinthesizeofthetargethypothesisand areductioninthesizeofthehypothesisspacewhichimproveslearningperformance [29]. Based on our assumptions in Section 3.4, we consider an analogy between the humanreusingofpreviouslylearnedconceptsandtheintroductionofpredicatedefinitions into a new learning context. By referring to Definition 9, we attribute a beneficial effect of a curriculum on human comprehension over another curriculum to an improvement in the sample complexity based on the analysis in [29]. Conjecture 3 (Sequential teaching curriculum improvement):C =C (ST( 1 seq Ds,Es,λ ,Ms),H)andC =C (ST(Ds,Es,λ ,Ms),H)aresequentialteaching 1 2 seq 2 curricula where Ds is a set of n predicate definitions and D ∈ Ds is a predicate definition, Es are sets of examples, λ ,λ :Ds×Es×Ms→N are rank functions, 1 2 MsisasetofmachinelearningalgorithmsandH isahumangroup.R ,R denote 1 2 ranks of D such that (R ,D) ∈ C and (R ,D) ∈ C . For 1 ≤ i ≤ n such that 1 1 2 2 (R ,D )∈C and R <R , let p denote the sum of the number of predicates in D i i 1 i 1 i andubetheminimumnumberofclausestoexpressD usingD .For1≤j ≤nsuch i that(R ,D )∈C andR <R ,letp+cdenotethenumberofpredicatesinD and j j 2 j 2 j 18 LunAietal. u+kbetheminimumnumberofclausestoexpressDusingD .E (C ,C ,D)>0 j seq 1 2 when: uln(p)<(u+k)ln(p+c) Given a target predicate D and a fixed human search bound B(D,H) for a human groupH,humanlearnersaremorelikelytofindDifthehypothesisspaceassociated becomes smaller as a result of learning new knowledge prior to learning D. For a fixed set of training examples in two curricula, a reduction in sample complexity correlates to a decrease in predictive error and an improvement in performance. 4 Experimental framework In previous works [2,66], human comprehension was measured by the accuracy withwhichparticipantsansweredclassificationquestions.Theaccuracyofproblemsolvingperformanceforclassificationtasksandsequentialdecision-makingtaskscan be different due to the nature of the operations involved. In this section, we present our approach to evaluating human sorting performance based on statistics and describe our experimental hypotheses in relation to the theoretical framework. 4.1 Evaluating human comprehension of sorting For merging and sorting, human comprehension corresponds to the competence of participantstoarrangeitemswithrespecttothetotalorderingoftheitems.Decisions related to the arrangement of items are reflected by the classification of items into respectivepositionsinthesequence.Whiletheout-of-sampleclassificationaccuracy is an objective measure of human comprehension for classification tasks, it does not estimate the error of sequential predictions. Although alternative metrics exist, we useSpearman’srankcorrelationcoefficient[87]asameanstoassesstheerrorbetween theexpectedsequenceandtheactualsequenceprovidedbyaparticipant.Spearman’s rankcorrelationcoefficientisanon-parametricrankcorrelationtestandindicatesthe degree of monotonic ordering between two variables. Given two sequences of values representingsamplesoftwovariables,whenSpearman’srankcorrelationcoefficientis +1or−1,itmeansthevariablesareperfectlymonotonicfunctionsofeachother.On theotherhand,whenSpearman’srankcorrelationcoefficienttendsto0,itindicates there is no monotonic relationship between the two variables. We use Spearman’s rankcorrelationcoefficienttoexaminetheextentofmonotonicalignmentbetweena sequence of integers that has been provided by