teaching curricula in which learningmergingbeforelearningsortingresultsinabetterhumancomprehensionof sorting in contrast to learning sorting before learning merging. This result demonstrates an improvement in human comprehension as a result of learning concepts with increasing complexity. We refer to the cognitive window [2] to account for the lack of explanatory effects on human comprehension of merging. It is difficult to improve human comprehension from explanations generated from machine-learned ruleswhenthecognitivecostofthetaskisalreadylow.Inthiscase,explanationsdo notcauseasufficientlyhighimprovementinthecognitivecostofperformingthetask. However, we have taken a rather conservative approach which has led to interesting preliminary results of sequential teaching in a specific domain. While this work is anextendedinvestigationofmachinelearningcomprehensibilitybasedontranslated logic programs, we also acknowledge the potential of developing comprehensibility definitionsbeyondsymbolicmachinelearningandournoise-freeframeworkforfuture work. 40 LunAietal. Instruction-based teaching approaches have the advantage of clarity and directnessforhumanlearning[90]andallowpreviousknowledgetobeintegratedwithnew problem-solving contexts [35]. However, such teaching approaches may impose an over-restrictiononthelinksbetweenactionsandoutcomesandthereforefailtotriggeranindividualisedunderstandinggeneralisedfromthematerial[20].Inthehuman trial, we employed a mixed approach to teaching that combined instruction-based learningwithdiscoverylearning.Weexploredamachine-humanteachinginteraction wherecurriculaallowahigherdegreeoffreedomforlearnerstore-discovercomputationallyefficientalgorithms.Weobservedadaptationsofhumansortingstrategiesto utilise advanced techniques of divide-and-conquer. Such strategy adaptations were observed in humans who learned with explanations and in humans who learned concepts with incremental complexity. When both conditions were fulfilled, humans adapted to an efficient divide-and-conquer strategy with higher performance. We attribute these results to the contextualisation of abstract concepts by explanations andtheaccessibilityoflearnedknowledgefromthereductionincomplexityinsearching the hypothesis space. In these cases, human learners were able to adapt sorting strategies reminiscent of efficient machine sorting algorithms. Although the analysed participant sample had no background in programming, they adapted sorting strategies by employing divide-and-conquer techniques commonly found in efficient computational sorting algorithms. While not all inspected human learners managed to consistently perform these sorting algorithms after studying from short learning sessions, being able to develop “near-miss” versions of the merge sort algorithm is a remarkable achievement for those with no background in programming. An exciting prospect of sequential teaching curricula is that machines and humans could take up more active roles to enable two-way cooperative learning [85]. Sequentialteachingcurriculacanbeextendedtorepresentthecoordinationbetween humans and machines in a back-and-forth fashion. Human implicit decision-making (System1)couldbemadeexplicit(System2)[46]tobenefithumanproblem-solving [81] by machine-learned theories via a process known as behavioural cloning [19]. Traces of human problem solutions can be provided as inputs to an ILP system, whichmightproduceexplicitalgorithmsfromthetracestopresenttothehumanas explanations.A“cleanup”effectonahuman’sbehaviourscanbeachievedbasedon the error estimation of the machine-learned human algorithm in training. The debugging of behaviours guided by the prediction of error of a human strategy can be beneficialinintelligenttutoring[95]andforcooperativeprogramminginalgorithmic debugging [84]. Future work may also explore the phenomenon of human re-discovery of wellestablished domain knowledge. An investigation of partially guided development of efficientproblem-solvingstrategieswouldrequireexposingtheimplicitcognitiveprocesses.Externaltoolssuchaseye-trackingdevices[15]canbeusedtocapturesubtle motions of the human body to help us infer implicit human decision-making. Our observations have shown the creativeness of human learning in exploiting the analogical transfer of partial solution structure. For machine learners, insights obtained inotherdomainscanbeutilisedtolearnflexibleandefficientproblemsolutions[18, 50]. For human learners, the division of information into smaller “chunks” and the presentationofrule-basedexplanationsfacilitatethetransferofpriorknowledgeinto a new problem-solving context [10]. The inclusion of both teaching techniques has the potential to trigger sudden realisations of previously incomprehensible concepts that might lead to innovative learning outcomes. In contrast, the absence of these Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 41 teachingmechanismsmighthinderhumanlearningofcomplextasksandleadtomore laborious problem-solving strategies. However, further investigations are needed to gainabetterunderstandingofthedegreetowhichsequentialteachingcurriculawith machine-learned explanations facilitate novel human comprehension. Declarations – Funding ThisresearchwaspartiallysupportedbyTAILOR,aprojectfundedbyEUHorizon 2020 research and innovation programme under GA No. 952215. The third author acknowledges support from the UK’s EPSRC Human-Like Computing Network. – Conflict of interest/Competing interests The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose. – Ethics approval Ethicsapprovalwasnotrequired.Includeddataandexperimentswereconducted by Imperial College London. Prior to carrying out the experiment, the authors hadreferredtotheethicsapprovalguidelineprovidedbyImperialCollegeLondon (https://www.imperial.ac.uk/research-ethics-committee/ethics-approval-overview/). The authors had assessed that none of the five criteria applied to the planned experiment. Hence, the judgement was "No, we do not need to apply". The authors confirmed with the Research Governance and Integrity team at Imperial College London who accepted the authors’ judgement. – Consent to participate Informedconsentforparticipationintheexperimentwasobtainedfromallindividual participants included in the study. – Consent for publication Informed consent for publication of data was obtained from all individual participants included in the study. – Availability of data and materials Experimental material and data have been made available at https://github.com/LAi1997/sequential-teaching. – Code availability Source code has been made available at https://github.com/LAi1997/sequential-teaching. 42 LunAietal. – Authors’ contributions Author1wroteallpapersectionsexceptSection5.1.Author2wroteSection5.1. Author 2, 3 and 4 provided feedback and corrections on all paper sections. References 1. A.AdadiandM.Berrada. Peekinginsidetheblack-box:Asurveyonexplainableartificial intelligence(xai). IEEE Access,6:52138–52160,2018. 2. L.Ai,S.Muggleton,C.Hocquette,M.Gromowski,andU.Schmid.Beneficialandharmful explanatorymachinelearning. Machine Learning,110:695–721,2021. 3. V. Aleven and K. R. Koedinger. An effective metacognitive strategy: Learning by doing andexplainingwithacomputer-basedcognitivetutor. Cognitive science,26(2):147–179, 2002. 4. L. Alfieri, P. Brooks, N. Aldrich, and H. Tenenbaum. Does discovery-based instruction enhancelearning? Journal of Educational Psychology,103:1–18,2011. 5. O.Amir,F.Doshi-Velez,andD.Sarne.Summarizingagentstrategies.AutonomousAgent Multi-Agent System,33:628–644,2019. 6. J. R. Anderson, J. M. Fincham, and S. Douglass. The role of examples and rules in the acquisition of a cognitive skill. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,23(4):932,1997. 7. J. R. Anderson, N. Kushmerick, and C. Lebiere. Rules of the Mind, chapter The Tower ofHanoiandgoalstructures,pages121–142. Hillsdale,NJ:L.Erlbaum,1993. 8. J.R.AndersonandR.Thompson. Use of Analogy in a Production System Architecture, page267–297. CambridgeUniversityPress,USA,1989. 9. S.Anjomshoae,A.Najjar,D.Calvaresi,andK.Främling. Explainableagentsandrobots: Results from a systematic literature review. In Proceedings