application with respecttoanexecutionstack.Ahumantrialofsequentialteachingwasconductedto examine the effects of concept ordering in curricula and explanations in the context of learning an efficient sorting strategy. We hypothesise the improvement of human comprehension from sequential teaching as the result of the reduction in the size of the hypothesis space associated with the target concept definition. Our proposed framework is consistent with empirical evidence collected from the human trial involving participants with no background in programming. We summarise the paper’s contributions as follows: – We define a measure to evaluate beneficial/harmful explanatory effects of a sequential teaching curriculum on human comprehension. – Wehypothesisetheimprovementofhumancomprehensionfromsequentialteaching curricula based on the Blumer bound [17]. – Wedemonstratebasedonananalysisofempiricalresultsthatasequentialteaching curriculum with increasing concept complexity has a beneficial effect on human comprehension. – We show results that indicate the re-discovery of divide-and-conquer algorithms after human novices learn from concepts with increasing complexity. – Weprovideevidenceoftheoptimisationofproblem-solvingstrategyasaresultof additionally studying explanations generated from machine-learned logic rules. This paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we review the literature relevant to the paper. In Section 3, we present our theoretical framework of sequential teaching curricula. In Section 4, we describe our empirical approach including the experimentalhypotheses.InSection5,weshowtheresultsofourmainAmazonMechanicalTurkexperimentthatinvolvedteachinghumanparticipantstosortbasedon thetraining ofmerging twoordered sequences. InSection5.5, weprovideadetailed discussion of our findings on the effects of curriculum order and explanations on human comprehension. In Section 6, we provide a review of our work and comment onourcontributions.Weadditionallydiscussfutureextensionstothedemonstrated results, behavioural cloning and human knowledge re-discovery. 4 LunAietal. 2 Related work This section summarises related research on human-machine teaching interactions andhighlightsourmotivations.Wegiveanoverviewofrelatedresultsinhumanlearning in Psychology. This is followed by a brief account of learning between humans and machines and objective means for evaluating the comprehensibility of machine explanations. 2.1 Human learning in curricula with explanations Theabilityofhumanstorecogniseandextractknowledgeusefultoaproblem-solving contextisdependentonpriorexperienceandunderstandingofrelateddomains[10]. While a classification decision is dependent only on information concerning the currentstate,goal-directeddecision-makingrequiresconsiderationofadecision’spossibleeffectonfuturestates[14].Forsequentialdecision-makingtaskssuchastheTower ofHanoi,statetransitionsoftheproblemsolutioncanbeexplicitlyexpressedbyrules [83].“Chunking”reusablesub-goalswasdemonstratedasanefficientproblem-solving approach to encode problem-solution structures and reduce the load on short-term memory [10]. Therelianceofhumanproblemsolvingontheproblemdomainandexperienceof aperson[33]canbeattributedtoimplicit(System1)andexplicit(System2)knowledge[46].Incontrasttoimplicitknowledgewhichisonlyattainablethroughpractice, declarative knowledge can be transferred explicitly in the form of explanations [25]. For knowledge accumulation, explicit explanations and hints help make sense of the newinformationandallowintegrationintoexistingknowledge[35].Inthecontextof solvingsimplelogicalproblems[27,48]andgeneratingLOGOprograms[51],guided learninghasbeendemonstratedmoreefficientthanexploration-orientedapproaches. However, multiple studies suggest that explanations should not be presented alone. Asdemonstratedby[3,6,16],humanlearnersdonotalwaysbenefitfromexplanations whenthespecificproblem-solvingcontextisabsent.Thecombinationofexplicitguidanceandworkedexamplesprovidesagoodhands-onproblem-solvingexperiencefor learners to study and practise for themselves due to the limited capacity of working memory [90]. The presentation of worked examples along with explanations makes this specific task context available and was shown to support learning [4,75]. 2.2 Teaching between the machine and humans Machine teaching is an area of machine learning that focuses on the optimisation of training sets and the design of teaching protocols in an example-based setting [96]. Studies in machine teaching have provided formal methods for teaching situations in which the goal is to train human students via an optimal set of examples to learn a target hypothesis. The machine teacher in these setups [55,73,93] is providedinformationaboutthequantifiedcognitivemodelofthehumanlearnerandhas access to the learning progress based on the student’s responses to examples. The teachercanthenmonitorthereactionsofstudentswhichallowstheteachertomake adjustments to teaching materials. However, often excessive assumptions about the teacher’sknowledgearemadeforderivingtheoreticalresults.Theteacherisusually Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 5 assumedtohaveperfectknowledgeaboutthecomputationalmodelofstudentssuch astheirlearningrateandtheirbackgroundknowledge[32].Thus,owingtothespecificity of these theoretical models, they are difficult to apply in real-world teaching settings. Communicationofmachine-learnedsolutionscanbealternativelyrealisedthrough explanations in the form of rules. For Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) [67], systems use logic programs to represent hypotheses as generalisations of examples and background knowledge. ILP systems make use of both induction and abduction, which are critical mechanisms for human knowledge attainment [43,52]. A hypothesis learned by an ILP algorithm is represented as a set of rules and can be used to communicatethediscoveredknowledgetohumans.Forinstance,anILPsystem[13] learnsoptimalstrategiesofchessendgamesfordepths0,1and2andincorporatesa complexityconstraintonthenumberofclausesinapredicatedefinitionbasedonthe hypothesised limitation of working memory capacity of 7±2 “chunks” [61]. A fully automated discovery system [47] re-discovers the role of genes of known function by combining ILP-based scientific discovery software with a laboratory robot. In [88], the ILP system produces hypotheses as logic rules that depict the chemical connectivity of molecules and predict mutagenicity, which accommodates collaboration withahumanchemist.However,inmostsystems,itremainsanongoingchallengeto ensurehumanunderstandingduetothehighcomplexityofinformationencodedvia these interfaces. In a recent work [2], it was shown that visual and textual explanations for playing a simple two-player game, generated based on rules learned by an ILP system, may cause improvement or degradation in human comprehension after a brief study. The authors demonstrated that the outcome of studying explanations provided is affected by a cognitive window which takes account of the descriptive complexity and execution requirements of the rules. 2.3 Operational measures of human understanding in AI Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) is an area of AI that studies AI systems that allow human understanding by providing human-readable explanations of decisions based on structures and functions. Researchers have attempted to devise AI systems to present knowledge attained in various formats, such as texts [42,56], visualisations[72,77,91,92]andvisualisation-texthybriddemonstrations[80].Simpler explanationsoflocalpredictionscanbedevisedtoprovidealocalisedunderstanding ofalearnedclassificationmodel[76].Forreinforcementlearningapplications,learned strategiesareimplicitlyencodedbypolicyfunctionswithcontinuousdomainswhich are difficult for humans to understand. This concern about the opacity of learned strategies was addressed by incorporating the use of relational biases [22,34,94] to enhance human understandability. In addition, case-based summaries of a policy [5] fromsetsofselectedstatesinalargerstatespaceofanagentallowalimitedhuman understanding of the agent’s decisions. In XAI,