10 Performancetest Noapplication 1 9 10 Total 4 16 20 Group 4 (SM/WOEX) Training Insertion Sort Application Noapplication Total Application 7 11 18 Performancetest Noapplication 0 1 1 Total 7 12 19 Group 4 achieved a higher mean score (p = .001 < .05) than the other strategies (µ=.644,σ=.399). 5.5 Discussion In Table 10, we present experimental hypotheses H1 to H5 and summarise their test outcomes. Since this work investigates the effect of curriculum order, we have acknowledged the possibility of recency and primacy effects on human sorting performance.Recencyandprimacyeffects[68]arecognitivebiaseswhichleadtobetter recallofitemsandconceptsthatarepositionedtowardsthebeginningandtheendof asequence.Asitispartofourexperimentalplantoexplorehowhumancomprehensionisaffectedbydifferentsequentialordersofconcepts,itisdifficulttocompletely eliminate the impact of position effects. In addition, Table 9 shows that various degrees of adaptations to efficient sorting algorithms happened in multiple groups. This indicates the adjustment of participants to different decision-making processes beyond making better or worse recall as a result of learning in sequential curricula. Basedonthedefinitionofsorter/2learnedbyMetagol afterlearningmerger/2 O in Table 1, the program size is u=3 and the number of predicates including those used in merger/2 is p = 8. For the definition of sorter/2 learned by Metagol O without learning merger/2 in the same table, the size of sorter/2 is u+k = 5 36 LunAietal. Table 10: H1 to H3 are hypotheses concerning the effects of curriculum order and explanations on human sorting comprehension. Hypotheses H4 and H5 relate to explanatory effects on human comprehension of merging and sorting strategy. At the top of table, H stands for hypothesis, T denotes test outcome. In the rightmost column, C is an abbreviation for confirmed, and N stands for not confirmed. H T H1 Learning merging before learning sorting leads to a beneficial effect on hu- C mancomprehensionofsortingwithrespecttolearningsortingbeforelearning merging H2 Learningmergingwithexplanationsresultsinabeneficialexplanatoryeffect N onhumancomprehensionofsortingwithrespecttolearningmergingwithout explanations H3 Learning merging with explanations further increases the beneficial effect of N curriculumorderonhumancomprehensionofsortingwithrespecttolearning mergingwithoutexplanations H4 Learningmergingwithexplanationsgeneratedfromruleswithoutalowcog- C nitive cost does not result in a beneficial explanatory effect on human comprehensionofmerging H5 Learningmergingwithexplanationsbeforelearningsortingleadstoadapta- C tionofefficienthumansortingstrategieswithbetterperformance and the number of predicates used is p+c = 6. According to the Conjecture 3, 3·ln(8)<5·ln(6)andlearningmergingbeforelearningsortingresultsinareduction in the size of the hypothesis space associated with the target hypothesis of sorting. TheANOVAtestandTukey’sHSDtestonsortperformancetestscores(Figure7b) demonstratedabeneficialeffectfromcurriculumorder.Ahighersortingperformance has been observed only in groups with the incremental curriculum setup. Since all four groups received the same material in each stage of the experiment so we can eliminate the possibility of learning merging or sorting being a major effect which led to the observed difference in sorting performance. Hence, we attribute the improvement in the performance score of sorting to the incremental curriculum order. This evidence confirms hypothesis H1 and E (C , C ,sorter) + seq MS/WEX SM/WEX E (C , C ,sorter) > 0 which supports Conjecture 3. seq MS/WOEX SM/WOEX Resultsonmergeandsortperformancetestsdidnotshowexplanatoryeffectsof the merger/2 rules learned by Metagol . The ANOVA test did not show a signifO icant effect of explanations on human comprehension and there was no significant interactioneffectonhumancomprehension.Therefore,werejecthypothesesH2and H3duetothelackofevidence.Learningmergingwithexplanationsdidnotimprove or degrade human comprehension of sorting in regard to learning merging without explanations. In addition, the ANOVA test on the merge performance test scores did not demonstrate an effect of explanations on human comprehension. This result confirms H4 and supports Conjecture 2. Since merging was taught in isolation independent from other secondary or tertiary concepts, we refer to the cognitive window (Remark 1) for a plausible account ofthislackofexplanatoryeffectonhumancomprehensionofmerging.Thecognitive Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 37 Table 11: Summary of the significance of participant’s strategy adaptation and performance improvement of the adapted algorithm compared with other algorithms. A tick denotes a significant analysis result, and a cross indicates an insignificant analysis outcome. Algorithm Isadaptation Isperformance Group adapted significant improvementsignificant Group1(MS/WEX) QS (cid:88) (cid:88) Group2(MS/WOEX) MS (cid:88) X Group3(SM/WEX) DS X (cid:88) Group4(SM/WOEX) IS (cid:88) (cid:88) cost of executing explained rules of merging is not sufficiently lower than the cognitivecostofoperatingamergingsolutionwithouttheauxiliaryinformation.Owingto limited cognitive capacities, a reduction in computational cost usually corresponds toanimprovementinperformance.However,solutionsofmergingafterreceivingexplanationswerenotsufficientlyoptimisedtoyieldanobservablyhigherperformance scorecomparedwithhumanprimitivesolutionsintheabsenceofexplanations.Given the tasks and the sequential teaching setup, an incremental curriculum order had a significant effect which improved human comprehension. The results provided a demonstration of the beneficial effect of sequential teaching on human comprehension. Furthermore,weexaminedhumancomparisonsandestimatedsortingalgorithms thatbestresembledhumansortingtraces.Thisanalysis(Table8)ledtotherecognitionoffourpossiblesortingstrategyadaptations.FromTable9andMcNemar’stests, we show that there is a significant difference in the algorithm application of quick sortinGroup1,mergesortinGroup2andinsertionsortinGroup4.Wearguethat theseresultssupportahigherproportionofstrategyadaptationstothesealgorithms. The additional t-tests compared the sorting performance of adapted strategies with other strategies. Quick sort in Group 1, dictionary sort in Group 3 and insertion sortinGroup4hadhigherperformanceincomparisonwithotheralgorithms.Table 11 summarises the participants’ adaptations to algorithms and the performance of responses with these adaptations. StrategyadaptationsinGroup1(MS/WEX)andGroup4(SM/WOEX)were significant and resulted in higher performance scores of the associated responses comparedwiththeotherstrategies.Aftersorttraining,Group1usedahighervolume ofquicksortlikestrategies.Thequicksortalgorithmiscomputationallyefficientwith an average linearithmic run-time and a worst-case quadratic run-time. Utilising the efficiencybenefitofconcentratingonpartsoftheoriginalproblemoneatatime,quick sortcreatesapivottoconstructtwosortedsub-sequences.Basedonthefollow-upttests,adaptationtoquicksortledtobettercomprehensioncomparedwithresponses thatusedtheothersortingstrategies.SinceinGroup1participantslearnedmerging 38 LunAietal. with explanations before learning sorting, this refutes the null hypothesis of H5. This positive difference in sorting performance from using quick sort in Group 1 allows us to confirm hypothesis H5. The t-test results of Group 1 and 3 (summarised in Table 11) suggest that curriculum order does not affect the performance of adapted strategies