to the theoretical framework. 4.1 Evaluating human comprehension of sorting For merging and sorting, human comprehension corresponds to the competence of participantstoarrangeitemswithrespecttothetotalorderingoftheitems.Decisions related to the arrangement of items are reflected by the classification of items into respectivepositionsinthesequence.Whiletheout-of-sampleclassificationaccuracy is an objective measure of human comprehension for classification tasks, it does not estimate the error of sequential predictions. Although alternative metrics exist, we useSpearman’srankcorrelationcoefficient[87]asameanstoassesstheerrorbetween theexpectedsequenceandtheactualsequenceprovidedbyaparticipant.Spearman’s rankcorrelationcoefficientisanon-parametricrankcorrelationtestandindicatesthe degree of monotonic ordering between two variables. Given two sequences of values representingsamplesoftwovariables,whenSpearman’srankcorrelationcoefficientis +1or−1,itmeansthevariablesareperfectlymonotonicfunctionsofeachother.On theotherhand,whenSpearman’srankcorrelationcoefficienttendsto0,itindicates there is no monotonic relationship between the two variables. We use Spearman’s rankcorrelationcoefficienttoexaminetheextentofmonotonicalignmentbetweena sequence of integers that has been provided by a human and the correctly arranged sequence produced by a machine algorithm. In addition, we take into consideration the possibility that participants provide incorrect answers that are inversely sorted with respect to the order specified in the experiment instructions. In this case, a coefficient score tending to −1 would mean that the participant successfully managed to sort the sequence but forgot the specified ordering. In the experiment trials, we found that such answers rarely occurred. However, in order to avoid diluting the significance of results due to the inclusionofnegativecoefficients,wedefinethefollowingfunctiontodiscountnegative coefficients and normalise all of them into the interval [0, 1]. Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 19 Table4:Weconsidertwoindependentexperimentalvariables.Theorderofconcepts in the curriculum (CO) is varied between learning merging before learning sorting (MS) and learning sorting before learning merging (SM). The presence of explanations generated from machine-learned rules (EX) alters between learning with explanations (WEX) and learning without explanations (WOEX). The performance score of human participants (PS) is the dependent experimental variable. Variablename Variabletype Treatmentabbreviations Curriculumorder(CO) Independentvariable MS,SM Presenceofexplanations(EX) Independentvariable WEX,WOEX Performancescore(PS) Dependentvariable – Definition 15 (Normalised performance score, perf(R ,R )) Given two sets h m ofintegersR andR ,adefineddiscountingconstant0<c<1andtheSpearman’s h m rank correlation coefficient ρ, the normalised performance score is defined as ( ρ(R ,R ), ρ(R ,R )≥0 perf(R ,R )= h m h m h m |ρ(R ,R )|·c, ρ(R ,R )<0 h m h m Example 6 shows the performance evaluation of two unordered sequences by comparing them to a sorted sequence. Example 6 Let R denote the sequence [4, 6, 5, 2, 3, 1], R denote the sequence h1 h2 [1,2,6,3,4,5] andR betheperfectlymonotonicsequence[1,2,3,4,5,6] sorted m byamachineprogram.ComparedwithR ,R hasonlyonenumberthatisoutof m h2 place.However,R isalmostasequencewithdecreasingmagnitudewithnumbers2 h1 and4misplaced.GivenR isamonotonicallyincreasingsequence,R alignsbetter m h2 with the machine output R and perf(R ,R )=.386 < perf(R ,R )=.657. m h1 m h2 m The Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient lies in the interval [-1, 1] and the absolute value of the negative coefficient is multiplied by a discounting constant. Based on results from multiple trials, the discounting constant c is set to .5 to moderately penalise responses that involve reversed sorted sequences. 4.2 Experimental hypotheses Wedefineourexperimentalhypothesesinthissection.Table4showstheexperimentalvariablesandtreatments.Weexaminetheeffectofthecurriculumorder(CO)via twoteachingarrangements:a)learningmergingbeforelearningsorting(MS)andb) learningsortingbeforelearningmerging(SM).Inaddition,weassesstheeffectofthe presence of explanations (EX) in two environments: a) learning with explanations of merging (WEX) b) learning without explanations of merging (WOEX). 20 LunAietal. Table5:Definitionsoftherankfunctions.IncurriculaMS/WEXandMS/WOEX, humans learn merging before learning sorting. In curricula SM/WEX and SM/WOEX, humans learn sorting before learning merging. The rank functions of MS assign a lower rank value to merging. The rank functions of SM assign a lower rank value to sorting. In curricula MS/WEX and SM/WEX, explanations about merging are generated from Metagol . O Curriculaabbreviation Rankfunctiondefinitions MS/WEX λ MS/WEX (merger,Emerge,MetagolO)=0 λ MS/WEX (sorter,Esort,∅)=1 MS/WOEX λ MS/WOEX (merger,Emerge,∅)=0 λ MS/WOEX (sorter,Esort,∅)=1 SM/WEX λ SM/WEX (merger,Emerge,MetagolO)=1 λ SM/WEX (sorter,Esort,∅)=0 SM/WOEX λ SM/WOEX (merger,Emerge,∅)=1 λ SM/WOEX (sorter,Esort,∅)=0 Explanations are not provided for learning sorting to avoid introducing merge prematurely in the curricula that learn sorting before learning merging. We use the normalised performance score perf in Definition 15 to measure both human performances of merging and sorting (PS). Let Ds = {merger,sorter} denote target theories of merging and sorting. Let Es={E ,E } where E denotes a sufficient set of examples for learning merge sort merge thetargettheoryofmergingandE isasufficientsetofexamplesforlearningthe sort target theory of sorting. Both human learners and Metagol are provided with the O same sets of examples Es. Let Ms = {Metagol ,∅} denote the machine learning O algorithmsusedtolearnrulesforgeneratingexplanationsand∅isanemptyprogram. H stands for a human group. The rank functions for curricula that learn merging beforelearningsortingaredefinedasλ andλ .Therankfunctions MS/WEX MS/WOEX ofcurriculathatlearnmergingbeforelearningsortingaredefinedasλ and SM/WEX λ . The definitions of the rank functions are summarised in Table 5. SM/WOEX Let C = C (ST(Ds, Es, λ , Ms), H) denote the human MS/WEX seq MS/WEX comprehension of the sequential teaching curriculum that learns merging before learning sorting with explanations of merging. Let C = C (ST(Ds, Es, MS/WOEX seq λ , Ms), H) denote the human comprehension of the sequential teachMS/WOEX ing curriculum that learns merging before learning sorting without explanations of merging. Let C = C (ST(Ds,Es, λ , Ms), H) denote the huSM/WEX seq SM/WEX man comprehension of the sequential teaching curriculum that learns sorting before learningmergingwithexplanationsofmerging.LetC =C (ST(Ds,Es, SM/WOEX seq λ , Ms), H) denote the human comprehension of the sequential