task, which would introduce task familiarity effects (the high-complexity-first condition would havecompletedmorehigh-complexitytasksthanthelow-complexity-firstcondition). This approach does not pose a good control since each group would complete a different task. Fig. 2: Each MaRs-IB item consists of an incomplete 3×3 matrix in which 8 cells withshapediconsdepictamodificationruleto(an)abstractshape(s).Thetestasks the participant to fill in the missing piece at the right bottom corner of the 3×3 matrixbychoosingoneoffourprovidedoptions(A,B,CandD).Thecorrectanswer to this example is A. Using an intelligence test avoids interference with the experiment since the test should not influence strategy development in the experimental task in a way that couldbeconsideredtoworkagainstthesequentialorderoftheexperiment.However, theoriginalRavenMatricestestandmanycomparabletestsareexpensiveandcannot bedigitizedduetocopyright.Thematrixreasoningitembank(MaRs-IB)hasneither of these two issues [26], thus making it an appropriate candidate for establishing a measure of intelligence in an online experiment. In addition, the authors of the MaRs-IB test set reported acceptable internal consistency and convergent validity, and reasonable test-retest reliability [26]. Although there is no normalized score which would be comparable to the IQ, the MaRs-IB test can serve as a measure of the relative cognitive ability of participants. Another concern regards the open accesstothematerial[26]andfamiliaritywiththetestfromotherstudies.Thisrisk can be mitigated by randomised arrangement and the selection of items from the multiple test sets provided by the authors. 24 LunAietal. Application The authors [26] provided three sets of 80 items (Figure 2). Each of these sets uses different symbols and is available in three further variations though colour-visiondeficientsubjectswereinformednottoparticipate.Thetestingproceduredescribed in the validation paper [26] will be consistently completed in under 10 minutes (8 minutes test and a series of practice items beforehand) and is thus applicable for our use case. Participants will train on 10 practice items until they completed three of them correctly. An item in the full test starts with a 500 milliseconds fixation cross, followed by a 100 milliseconds white screen mask [26]. The matrix will then be displayed for 30 seconds, or until the participant responded (whichever happens earlier). After 25 seconds a clock indicates that participants have 5 seconds left for this specific item [26]. Participants complete these items for a total of 8 minutes. The accuracy with which the participant chooses the correct missing pattern in the given time frame is considered the measurement of pre-test performance. 5.2 Materials The arrangement of objects arguably makes up a great proportion of human daily tasks. This implies a high familiarity of human participants with the task of sorting. The preferred sorting approaches of humans with no background knowledge in programming could resemble some sorting algorithms. However, we assume that learning recursive algorithms such as merge sort without a well-defined curriculum demands a great effort and applying such algorithms efficiently is challenging. Problem masking Inordertopreventparticipantsfromrelyingonthetotalorderingofnaturalnumbers, wedesignedanisomorphicproblemthatrepresentedintegersequencesbytheweights of fruits in piles. Numbers were masked by visual icons of fruits and the numeric values were hidden from participants. A balance scale mechanism (Figure 3) was introducedtoallowparticipantstocomparetheweightsbetweentwofruitsandacted asaninstrumentforconstructingthetotalorderingofthenumbers.Theimmediate access to the total ordering of natural numbers was prevented and participants had toestablishitthemselves.Thissetupwasusedforteachingbothmergingandsorting. Asolutionofthissetupcorrespondedtoasolutionofmergingandsortingasequence of numbers without changing the underlying solution structure. According to the definition of isomorphic problems [86], the new fruit weighing problemsareisomorphictotherespectiveproblemsformergingandsortingnumbers. Such isomorphic translations only affect the initial stage of problem-solving while attempting to recognise a useful analogy via analogical access but do not hinder problem-solving via analogical inference if an analogy for the problem has been consciously recognized [38,44,74]. Owing to the difficulty of immediately recalling past experiences of merging and sorting, we anticipated that participants would initially perform less optimal merging and sorting strategies and there would be more potential for performance improvement later. Forthetrainingandperformancetestofmergingandsorting,werandomlysampled sequences of various lengths to provide a spectrum of problem difficulty. For Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 25 Fig.3:Participantswereaskedtodistinguishbetweentwoalternativechoicesbyusingtheprovidedbalancescaleandsubmitthecorrect sequence by pressing a button to the right. 26 LunAietal. Fig. 4: On the top row, the visualisations show the comparison result (fruits B and C). The textual explanations explicitly describe the objects involved (fruits B and C) and the actions performed (comparison and appending) which resulted in C being appended before B due to C’s lesser weight. On the bottom row, the interface highlighted in red that fruits were out of order (B and C) and described the correct ordering. Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 27 Fig.5:Sorttraininginterface.Insorttraining,participantswereadvisedtosortsequencesoffruits(inthiscasefruitsA,D,B,C,Eand F) in the centre white box called the “whiteboard” and provided instructions to efficiently use it. The “whiteboard” was a device of the interface which allowed a free arrangement of the input fruit sequence by using a mouse to drag and drop fruits. The labels and fruits wereintentionallyrandomisedbeforethe experimentsothatparticipantswouldnot receivethewrongimpression thatthesequence had been already alphabetically ordered. 28 LunAietal. eachofthequestionsequences,wemadesurethatitwasnottrivialandrequiredan appropriate level of computational effort for a machine program to sort. A question in the merge training and performance test involved two sub-sequences of similar sizes as inputs and the length of each sub-sequence ranged from 1 to 4. Inthesorttrainingandperformancetest,aquestionconsistsofafruitsequence and the length of sequences varied from 6 to 10. In the pilot trials, we identified a higher usage of the insertion sort algorithm. For generating sort training and testing questions,