11 summarises the participants’ adaptations to algorithms and the performance of responses with these adaptations. StrategyadaptationsinGroup1(MS/WEX)andGroup4(SM/WOEX)were significant and resulted in higher performance scores of the associated responses comparedwiththeotherstrategies.Aftersorttraining,Group1usedahighervolume ofquicksortlikestrategies.Thequicksortalgorithmiscomputationallyefficientwith an average linearithmic run-time and a worst-case quadratic run-time. Utilising the efficiencybenefitofconcentratingonpartsoftheoriginalproblemoneatatime,quick sortcreatesapivottoconstructtwosortedsub-sequences.Basedonthefollow-upttests,adaptationtoquicksortledtobettercomprehensioncomparedwithresponses thatusedtheothersortingstrategies.SinceinGroup1participantslearnedmerging 38 LunAietal. with explanations before learning sorting, this refutes the null hypothesis of H5. This positive difference in sorting performance from using quick sort in Group 1 allows us to confirm hypothesis H5. The t-test results of Group 1 and 3 (summarised in Table 11) suggest that curriculum order does not affect the performance of adapted strategies since Group 1 experienced the incremental curriculum and Group 3 received the decremental curriculum. This observation contrasts with the overall performance analysis which showscurriculumorderaffectstheperformanceofsorting.ItimpliesthatthedecrementalcurriculuminGroup3reducestheperformanceofstrategiesthathavealower changeinapplicationrate.Wepostulatethatwithoutthebenefitoftheincremental curriculum and a compact hypothesis space (Conjecture 3), it is difficult to develop rules that consistently represent the other algorithms (quick sort and merge sort). In addition, we observed in Group 1 that learning incrementally with explanations ledtoasignificantadaptationofanefficientsortingstrategy(quicksort)whichalso has enhanced performance. This shows the association of a higher task competency with the development of novel problem solutions in novices. Impacts of explanations on performance As summarised in Table 11, in Group 1 and 3 where explanations were presented, theadaptationstoefficientsortingapproachescorrespondtoimprovedperformance. Asignificantnumberofparticipantsadaptedtoquicksortlikeapproachesandsome participants adjusted to dictionary sort like strategies in Group 3. Although the dictionarysortalgorithmsharesmanysimilartraitstoinsertionsort,dictionarysort isconsideredadivide-and-conqueralgorithmwhichiterativelymakesbinarysearches for the correct position of an object in a sequence. We attribute this phenomenon to a better understanding of efficiently merging: two input sequences are sorted and redundant comparisons can be avoided by interleaving comparisons of fruits from input sequences. Provided explanations emphasised the optimal problem-solution structure and illustrated the action sequence by walking through examples with participants. The contexts provided by explanations and examples are effective for the human learning of abstract concepts [3,6, 16,75]. We suggest that in the presented teaching setup, explanations of merging involving examples grounded the concept of binary selection and contextualised the constructionofproblemsolutionsthatutilisedthisinformation.Asaresult,problem solutionsthatincorporatedthisideahadlesspotentialforerrorsandachievedhigher performance. This proposition can be partially supported by the increase in the usage of insertion sort like strategies in Group 4 (SM/WOEX) where explanations were absent. While insertion sort like strategies correlated to better scores in sort performancetestresponsesofGroup4,theinsertionsortalgorithmdoesnotinvolve a divide-and-conquer or binary selection component to sorting and does not share these features with quick sort or dictionary sort. Impacts of curriculum order on strategy adaptation Another observation from Table 9 and 11 is that a significant number of responses in Group 2 (MS/WOEX) adapted to merge sort. While this strategy adaptation of Group 2 to merge sort did not correlate with a higher performance score compared with the other strategies, divide-and-conquer algorithms such as quick sort Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 39 andmergesortthatrequireanadvancedunderstandingofcomputationalalgorithms could be rather difficult for novices to comprehend in a limited time frame. Based on Table 9 and 11, it is noteworthy that a significant number of participants in Group1and2appearedtohavedevelopedsortingapproachessimilartothesewellknowndivide-and-conqueralgorithmswhentheywerepresentedwithconceptswith increasing complexity. A tentative account of this phenomenon can be referred to Conjecture3.InConjecture3,twocurriculaarecomparedintermsofthesizeofthe compositehypothesisspacesoflearningsometargetpredicates.Learningconceptsin an incremental fashion reduces the size of the hypothesis space. Since humans have limited working memory capacity, it becomes easier for humans to find a consistent hypothesis that incorporates new information in the associated hypothesis space. DespiteperformanceimprovementsofadaptedstrategiesinbothGroup1and3, the adaptation of an efficient strategy was significant and led to better performance in only Group 1, as summarised in Table 11. As Group 1 exclusively experienced incremental curriculum and machine-learned explanations, this result highlights the impact of combining both components on human learning for promoting task performance and developing novel problem solutions. Although it cannot be assessed by the present framework whether the participants mentally formulated quick sort or merge sort in an explicit way, further investigations of sequential teaching could devise machine learning to derive human strategy from behavioural traces. 6 Conclusions and further work Previous publications [2,66] on the topic of comprehensibility have investigated the classificationofexplanatorymachinelearningintobeneficialandharmfulcategories. The current work proposes an extension of frameworks of comprehensibility [66] and explanatory effects [2] to account for the effects of sequence teaching. Owing to the reduction in the size of the hypothesis space [29], we hypothesise that learning concepts with increasing complexity enables humans to learn the target hypotheses given limited working memory capacity. This conjecture is supported by our empirical results. Inthelimitedscopeofourexperimentwhichfocusesonhumanlearningofsorting algorithms, we have identified an instance of sequential teaching curricula in which learningmergingbeforelearningsortingresultsinabetterhumancomprehensionof sorting in contrast to learning sorting before learning merging. This result demonstrates an improvement in human comprehension as a result of learning concepts with increasing complexity. We refer to the cognitive window [2] to account for the lack of explanatory effects on human comprehension of merging. It is difficult to improve human comprehension from explanations generated from machine-learned ruleswhenthecognitivecostofthetaskisalreadylow.Inthiscase,explanationsdo notcauseasufficientlyhighimprovementinthecognitivecostofperformingthetask. However, we have taken a rather conservative approach which has led to interesting preliminary results of sequential teaching in a specific domain. While this work is anextendedinvestigationofmachinelearningcomprehensibilitybasedontranslated logic programs, we also acknowledge the potential of