harmful to H if E (D,H,M(E))<0 ex – Otherwise, M(E) learned from E does not have an effect on H Whether or not an explanatory effect is significantly beneficial or harmful can be determined empirically by applying an independent two-sample t-test or similar method to the means of unaided- and machine-explained human comprehension. In thecasethatthemeandifferenceisnotsignificant,wecannotclassifytheeffectofa machine-learned theory as either beneficial or harmful. The definitions of human comprehension and explanatory effects are extended to account for the ordering of concepts. We define a sequential teaching curriculum to contain a set of concept definitions, sets of examples and explanations. The arrangementofconceptsinacurriculumcanbedecidedbasedonanorderingfunction which outputs a score to rank concepts. Definition 5 (Curriculumrankfunction,λ(D,E,M))Givenasetofpredicate definitions Ds, sets of examples Es and a set of machine learning algorithms Ms, λ:Ds×Es×Ms→Nisarankfunctionthatreturnstherankvalueofanypredicate definition D∈Ds in a curriculum. A sequential teaching curriculum contains “chunks” of teaching material and a curriculumhasatleastonesuch“chunk”.Theorderofconceptsreceivedbyhumans is determined by a defined rank function which assigns a score to every block of teachingmaterialwhichcontainstheconceptdefinitions,examplesandexplanations. 12 LunAietal. Definition 6 (Sequential teaching curriculum, ST(Ds, Es, λ, Ms)): Given that Ds = {D ,D , ... D } is a set of predicate definitions of size n, Es = {E ,E , 1 2 n 1 2 ..., E } contains sets of examples where E are examples of D for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, Ms n i i denotes a set of machine learning algorithms and λ:Ds×Es×Ms→N is a rank function, a sequential teaching curriculum ST(Ds, Es λ, Ms) is an enumerable set of tuples {(R ,D ,E ,M ),(R ,D ,E ,M ),...,(R ,D ,E ,M )} in which R = 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 n n n n j λ(D ,E ,M )istherankofaconceptinthecurriculumfor1≤j ≤n.Asequential j j j teaching curriculum enumerates concepts with respect to increasing rank value. Humancomprehensionisconsideredaidedbyexplanationsifthemachine-learned logicprograminateachingmaterialblockisnotempty.Otherwise,humancomprehension is established based on training examples alone. We proceed to define the effectofasequentialteachingcurriculumonthehumancomprehensionofaconcept. Definition 7 (Humancomprehensionofexamplesinasequentialteaching curriculum, C (T,H)):GiventhatT =ST(Ds,Es,λ,Ms)isasequentialteachseq ing curriculum whereDsis asetof n predicate definitions,Esare sets ofexamples, λ:Ds×Es×Ms→Nisarankfunction,Msisasetofmachinelearningalgorithms and H is a human group, the human comprehension of examples in the sequential teaching curriculum is  (cid:12)   (cid:12) (cid:12) τ =C h (D i ,H,E i ), M i (E i )=∅  C (T,H)= (R ,τ)(cid:12) τ =C (D ,H,M (E )), M (E )6=∅ seq i (cid:12) ex i i i i i  (cid:12) (cid:12) for (R i ,D i ,E i ,M i )∈S,1≤i≤n  Weprovideexamplesofsequentialteachingdefinitionwhichspecifyacurriculum that presents training materials of merging before introducing training materials of sorting and a curriculum with the reverse order of teaching. Example 2 Let Ds = {merger,sorter} denote predicate definitions of merging and mergesort,E andE betherespectiveexamplesetsandEs={E ,E } merge sort merge sort andMs={Metagol }whichgeneratesexplanations.Wedefineλ (merger, O merge/sort E ,Metagol )=0andλ (sorter,E ,Metagol )=1.Letλ merge O merge/sort sort O sort/merge (merger, E , Metagol ) = 1 and λ (sorter, E , Metagol ) = 0. merge O sort/mergel sort O Themerge-then-sortcurriculumisrepresentedbyST(Ds,Es,λ ,Ms)which merge/sort teaches merging before teaching sorting and the sort-then-merge curriculum is denoted by ST(Ds, Es, λ ,Ms) which teaches sorting before teaching mergsort/merge ing. λ specifies the ordering of concepts in the merge-then-sort curriculum merge/sort ST(Ds,Es,λ ,Ms)andλ definestheorderingofconceptsinthe merge/sort sort/merge sort-then-merge curriculum ST(Ds, Es, λ , Ms). sort/merge Definition 8 (Effect of a sequential teaching curriculum, E (C , C , D)): seq 1 2 C = C (ST(Ds, Es, λ , Ms), H) and C = C (ST(Ds, Es, λ , Ms), H) are 1 seq 1 2 seq 2 sequentialteachingcurriculawhereDsisasetofnpredicatedefinitionsandD∈Ds isapredicatedefinition,Es={E,...}aresetsofexamples,λ ,λ :Ds×Es×Ms→ 1 2 N are two rank functions, Ms is a set of machine learning algorithms and H is a human group. R = λ (D,E,M ) and R = λ (D,E,M ) are the ranks of D 1 1 1 2 2 2 Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 13 in C and C where M ,M ∈ Ms. The explanatory effect of curriculum C over 1 2 1 2 1 curriculum C on predicate definition D is 2 E (C ,C ,D)=τ −τ seq 1 2 1 2 where (R ,τ )∈C , (R ,τ )∈C . 1 1 1 2 2 2 In Definition 7, comprehension measurements are obtained with respect to the ranking of concepts in a sequential teaching curriculum. The effect of a sequential teachingcurriculumreflectsthedegreetowhichhumancomprehensionofaconcept is affected by a curriculum. Given two sequential teaching curricula and a concept of interest, the effect of one curriculum over another curriculum corresponds to the difference in comprehension measurements of the concept. A significant difference in human comprehension as a result of learning from one curriculum over another curriculum can be classified as a beneficial or harmful effect of learning from the former curriculum. Definition 9 (Beneficial/harmful effect of a sequential teaching curriculum): Given that C = C (ST(Ds, Es, λ , Ms), H) and C = C (ST(Ds, 1 seq 1 2 seq Es, λ ,