engineeringapproaches,andcollaborationstrategies. selectingaparttorealizeaGreenFluorescenceReporterdevice, it may be desirable to select a less bright GFP variant that is betterunderstood(thusmorepredictable),knowntooperatein awiderrangeoforganisms,oravailableinapreferredassembly Predictability and Flexibility format. Ultimately, this is a matter of trust and focus: the The importance of predictability and flexibility as design morethatapractitionercantrustthepredictabilityoftheless requirementsisheightenedwhenadevice’sfunctionaldefinition interesting parts of their system (e.g., the Green Fluorescence isdivorcedfromitsrealizationasacompositeofdiscreteparts. Reporter),themorethattheycanfocusontheirprimarygoals Implementation of a function, whether at the level of a single 4 Aldulijan et al. 1. Curate GFP 2. Publish 3. Use ntri b ute E. coli o C User 4. GFP contributions from 4. BioBrickE. coli Fluorescent atgcgtaaaggag... Reporters 5. Review MoCloS. cerevisiae atgcgtaacttcg... 7. Republish 8. Update 6. Improve GFP S. cerevisiae Fig.3.Decouplingfunctionandsequenceenablesthedevelopmentofacollaborativeecosystemfordistributing,using,andimprovingbiologicaldevices. Inthisvision,(1)anexpertcuratesadeviceandasetofpartsthatcanimplementthedevice,(2)thenpublishestheseinacollectionwheretheycan bediscoveredbyothersyntheticbiologists,(3)whoputthedevicetouseinvariouscontexts.Thosepractitionersmay(4)contributeback“patches” toimprovethedevice, e.g., improvedcharacterizationorcontexttoleranceinformation, (5)whicharethenreviewedbyeithertheoriginalexpertor othershelpingtomaintainthecollection.Theexpertsmayalso(6)improvethecollectioninotherways,e.g.,byimprovingthedesignofthepartsthat implementthedevice.Alloftheseimprovementsarethen(7)madeavailablewhenthecollectionisrepublishedasanewversion,and(8)thedevice usersreceivethebenefitsoftheseimprovementsbyupdatingtothenewestversion. (e.g.,improvementofanovelmetabolitesensorwhoseactivity documentationthatcanusefullydescribethebehavior,context, isbeingreported). and constraints of a genetic object in the same way that Navigatingtherelationshipbetweenflexibility,predictability, otherengineeringdisciplinesseektodescribethespecifications and optimization of function is in general a challenging of a component. It also drives a need for characterization and unresolved problem in all engineering fields, and focused on improving the understanding of composability, particularly so for biology. Nevertheless, there are a number flexibility, predictability, and robustness. Explicitly studying of bioengineering tools, such as GFP, that are in common use and recording such information in a tool-friendly manner will precisely because they are reasonably effective at producing allow the information to be shared and redistributed more reasonablypredictablebehavioracrossafairlyflexiblerangeof broadly, and will allow practitioners to more readily benefit applicationsandoperatingconditions. Complementarily, there fromknowledgeandadvancesproducedbyothersinthefield. are operating conditions that are known to be unworkable, suchasusingGFPinananaerobicenvironment. Practitioners Collaborative Reduction of Technical Risk who have applied these tools have acquired a great deal of pragmatic knowledge about their range of flexibility and the Decoupling functional specifications and part sequences also conditions under which their behavior can be predicted. Some allowsnewapproachestocollaborationandinformationsharing ofthisaccumulatedknowledgehasfounditswayintoscientific that can reduce the risk of failure in engineering synthetic publications,butmuchofitisstillcommunicatedonlythrough biology systems. Here the key idea is that changes in parts informalchannelsandbywordofmouth. donotnecessarilyentailchangesindevicesorviceversa. FunctionalSyntheticBiologyproposesthatweshouldbegin Whenapartisimproved,thenewversionthatresultsmay capturing such knowledge in device specifications. Prior work still conform to the same device specifications that the old on predictive modeling (e.g., (27; 9; 23)) and reproducibility version satisfied, and thus be able to be substituted as an (e.g., (2; 1; 25)) can provide initial information for some implementationforthatdevice.Forexample,aGFPpartmight common devices. Similar information can be captured for be codon optimized to produce the protein more efficiently, other devices by collecting it from experts and the literature or have a restriction site eliminated to make it compatible or by conducting similar studies. Such knowledge can then withawiderrangeofassemblymethods. Ifthenewversionof be applied, if desired, in optimization processes, particularly the part still satisfies the Green Fluorescence Reporter device multi-objectiveoptimizationthatcanassignvaluetoflexibility specification, then it can be safely predicted that systems (e.g., (4)). Flexibility and predictability of devices may also using the old version can be upgraded to use the new version. be improved by applying methods for insulating devices from Likewise, a device may be improved with models that better context(e.g.,(20;22;7)). predict its interactions with other devices, or with better In sum, the focus on the functionality of a device rather documentationofitsexpectedoperationalrange,whilehaving than the sequence of a part reinforces the need for better noimpactonthesequenceofpartsthatimplementthedevice. Functional Synthetic Biology 5 This decoupling offers a new means of capturing expert the collection. Those improvements might include expanding knowledge, in the form of curated collections of devices and or sharpening characterization, augmenting context tolerance the recommended parts to implement them. For example, a information,clarifyingdocumentation,orenhancingthedesign typical synthetic biologist should never need to consider the ofthepartsthatimplementthedevice. 160differentvariationsofGFPinFPbase,letaloneothergreen Distributed version control can make it easy for users to proteins like ZsGreen or mNeonGreen. Instead, they should contribute their improvements back as suggested changes to be able to determine their intended operating range (e.g., E. the collection. Agile software tooling can support the curation coli DH5α in M9 media at 30 ◦C to 37 ◦C), select a Green ofsuchcontributions,makingitsimpletothemaintainersofa Fluorescence Reporter device that operates in that range, and collectiontoreviewanddiscussacontribution,requestchanges then implement it with any of the parts that are currently whereneeded,andapplyautomation-assistedvalidationchecks recommended by experts as a good implementation for that for quality control. Once incorporated, improvements can be device. takenupinanewversionofthecollectionthatismadeavailable If better parts become available or a problem is detected tothecommunitywhenthecollectionisrepublished.Userscan with one of the current parts, then all that needs to be thentakeadvantageofthebenefitsthesecuratedimprovements changed is the recommendation. As long as the functional provide simply by updating their copy of the collection to the characteristicsofthenewlyrecommendedpartcanbeassessed latestversion. to remain within the range of predictability that has been When implemented well, the transparency and checking in established for the Green Fluorescence Reporter device, any such processes can help build trust within a community of systemusingthedeviceshouldbeabletobesafelyupdatedto users and maintainers. The mechanisms of distributed version usethenewpart.Indeed,suchanupgraderecommendationcan controlalsohelptosustainanopenmarketplaceforcompetition alreadybefoundinthescientificliteratureforredfluorescence, betweenpackagesofinformationandtheirattendantprocesses when the developers of mCherry suggested phasing out and maintainers. Just as in the software world, Functional its predecessor, mRFP1, given mCherry’s improved “higher Synthetic Biology packages will compete not just on the basis extinction coefficient ...,