operate in multiple organisms Device insulation from 5’/3’ context Broad context devices & Flexibility Automated part & device quality control Characterization of context & usability Scope of Routine creation of 2-3 device systems Routine creation of 4-6 device systems Routine creation of 10+device systems Systems Operation in model microbes & cell-free Operation in non-model microbes Operation in multicellular organisms Adoption Core packages used by early adopters Communities share data via packages Broad adoption of Functional SynBio Fig.4.Suggestedroadmapofgoals,fromimmediatetolong-term,forachievingFunctionalSyntheticBiology. new packages focused on their own areas of interest, and sequencesthatdefinesthefieldtodaytoafocusonfunctionality will expand the functionality of existing packages by making thatwilltransformthewaysyntheticbiologyispracticedinthe incrementalupgradestothem.Thecomplexityofsystemsthat future.Thisrepresentsacriticalstepforwardalongthepathto can be routinely engineered will increase, as will levels of achievingsystemslevelengineering,withimprovementsindata automation. sharing leading to increases in flexibility and predictability, The ability to support more effective sharing of data will whichinturnopenupopportunitiesforenhancedcollaboration then facilitate better understanding and characterization of anddissemination.Itisourhopethatthispaperwillencourage operational context, expansion into non-model microbes, and others to build on the framework presented, to join us on our thecreationofmorecontext-agnosticdevicesthatcanoperate journey to transform the practice of synthetic biology using effectivelyinmultipletypesoforganisms.Overthelongerterm, theroadmapwehavelaidoutasaguide,andtohelpmobilize we anticipate a widespread adoption of Functional Synthetic the resources that will be required to bring that journey to a Biology, driven by the standardization of complex biological successfulconclusion. system engineering, the development of extremely flexible devices, and extension even to effective operation in vivo in Competing interests complexmulticellularorganisms. Following this roadmap will also require dealing with Nocompetinginterestisdeclared. non-technical challenges regarding incentives. For example, an initial investment in time and resources is needed from experienced practitioners before the community can benefit, Material Availability Statement and the people investing will not necessarily be the ones Notapplicable. who most benefit. Given the struggle to even obtain DNA sequence information from scientific publications (24), we can expectthatcurrentacademicincentiveswillnotbesufficienton Data Availability Statement their own to motivate widespread investment in the curation and publication of functional information. There will also be Notapplicable. questions around governance and degree of centralization for the evolving collection of functional packages. Finally, there Author contributions statement is an important collective action problem to be solved if the community wishes resources to be available under free and All authors contributed to conceptualization, writing the open licenses, as opposed to needing to pay for access to this originaldraft,andreviewandediting. information. Funding Conclusions This work was supported in part by the following funding Many practitioners of synthetic biology recognize the impact sources:J.Be.wassupportedbyAirForceResearchLaboratory thatstandardizingsystems-levelengineeringcouldhaveonthe (AFRL) and DARPA contract FA8750-17-C-0184. J.Bo. developmentofbiologicalsystemsandareeagertoexploitthe was supported by a Horizon Postdoctoral Fellowship from potentialithastodemocratizeaccesstocomplexbiotechnology Concordia University. M.H. was supported by funding from andeffecttransformativechangeinabroadrangeofsectorsand the ERC Advanced Grant LoopingDNA (no. 883684). N.S. application areas such as healthcare, manufacturing, energy, was supported by funding from the BBSRC under award agriculture,andenvironmentalsustainability. BB/M011178/1.G.V.wassupportedbyascholarshipfromthe To date, however, realizing that potential has proven School of Computing, Newcastle University. A.V. was funded elusive, in large part because the information required by Grant MINECO/AEI, EU DPI2017-82896-C2-1-R and for effectively engineering with biological parts and devices MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 grant number PID2020has been inaccessible, insufficient or incomplete. The 117271RB-C21. Functional Synthetic Biology framework presented here lays Thisdocumentdoesnotcontaintechnologyortechnicaldata the groundwork for a shift in orientation from the focus on controlled under either the U.S. International Traffic in Arms Functional Synthetic Biology 7 Regulations or the U.S. Export Administration Regulations. 14.Daniel G Gibson, Lei Young, Ray-Yuan Chuang, J Craig Views, opinions, and/or findings expressed are those of the Venter, Clyde A Hutchison, and Hamilton O Smith. author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the Enzymaticassemblyofdnamoleculesuptoseveralhundred official views or policies of the Department of Defense or the kilobases. Nature methods,6(5):343–345,2009. U.S.Government. 15.M. Hucka, A. Finney, H. M. Sauro, H. Bolouri, J. C. Doyle, H. Kitano, A. P. Arkin, B. J. Bornstein, D. Bray, A.Cornish-Bowden,A.A.Cuellar,S.Dronov,E.D.Gilles, M. Ginkel, V. Gor, I. I. Goryanin, W. J. Hedley, T. C. References Hodgman, J.-H. Hofmeyr, P. J. Hunter, N. S. Juty, J. L. Kasberger, A.Kremling, U.Kummer, N.LeNovere, L.M. 1. Jacob Beal, Natalie G Farny, Traci Haddock-Angelli, Loew, D. Lucio, P. Mendes, E. Minch, E. D. Mjolsness, VinooSelvarajah,GeoffSBaldwin,RussellBuckley-Taylor, Y. Nakayama, M. R. Nelson, P. F. Nielsen, T. Sakurada, Markus Gershater, Daisuke Kiga, John Marken, Vishal J. C. Schaff, B. E. Shapiro, T. S. Shimizu, H. D. Spence, Sanchania, et al. Robust estimation of bacterial cell count J.Stelling,K.Takahashi,M.Tomita,J.Wagner,J.Wang, from optical density. Communications biology, 3(1):1–29, and the rest of the SBML Forum. The systems biology 2020. markuplanguage(SBML):amediumforrepresentationand 2. JacobBeal,TraciHaddock-Angelli,GeoffBaldwin,Markus exchange of biochemical network models. Bioinformatics, Gershater, Ari Dwijayanti, Marko Storch, Kim De Mora, 19(4):524–531,mar2003. Meagan Lizarazo, Randy Rettberg, and with the iGEM 16.Samira Kiani, Jacob Beal, Mohammad R Ebrahimkhani, Interlab Study Contributors. Quantification of bacterial Jin Huh, Richard N Hall, Zhen Xie, Yinqing Li, and Ron fluorescence using independent calibrants. PloS one, Weiss. Crisprtranscriptionalrepressiondevicesandlayered 13(6):e0199432,2018. circuits in mammalian cells. Nature methods, 11(7):723– 3. Jacob Beal, Tyler E Wagner, Tasuku Kitada, Odisse 726,2014. Azizgolshani, Jordan Moberg Parker, Douglas Densmore, 17.Katherine A. Kiwimagi, Justin H. Letendre, Benjamin H. and Ron Weiss. Model-driven engineering