FunctionalSyntheticBiologyapproachfocuseson: sequence. In practice, however, synthetic biologists tend to think • descriptionsofbehavioroverdescriptionsofstructure, aboutdesignsmoreintermsoffunction.Consider,forexample, • predictability and flexibility over optimization of function, greenfluorescentprotein(GFP)asareporteroftranscriptional and activity(lefthalfofFigure1).AtypicaluserofGFPdoesnot • riskreductionovernovelty. think about the actual sequences and would be unlikely even torecognizeeitherthenucleicacidoraminoacidsequencesfor A focus on behavior means a biological component’s structure GFPiftheysawthem.Insteadtheyarelikelytothinkabouta (i.e., genetic sequence) should be able to be changed and functional relationship between a coding sequence (CDS) that improvedwithoutdamagingthefunctionalityofasystemthat produces a GFP protein, which in turn will fluoresce with a includesit. Afocusonpredictabilitymeansidentifyingclasses predictable excitation and emission behavior. This is a fully of changes that are unlikely to damage functionality, and a coherentnotionofbiologicalfunction,independentofsequence, focusonflexibilitymeansvaluingthebreadthofsuchclassesof andisthetypicalsubjectofdiscussionsanddiagramsregarding changeswhendevelopingbiologicalcomponents.Afocusonrisk design. reductionmeansrecognizingthattherearemanyfailuremodes Also associated with the notion of function is a concept of that can impair the functionality of a biological system, and an interface to that function (e.g., embedding the GFP in a thatthereisvalueincapturingknowledgeaboutfailuremodes transcriptionalunitwhoseactivityistobereported)andofthe (and how to avoid them) in the form of automation tools and typeofenvironmentswherethefunctionisexpectedtobehave machine-readablecomponentspecifications. aspredicted(e.g.,aerobicenvironmentswithrelativelyneutral pHacrossabroadrangeofcelltypes).ForFunctionalSynthetic Functional Synthetic Biology 3 A) B) C) D) Cre Cas9 enzyme Drop-out genomic loxP loxP U6 ncRNA sgRNA target Fig.2.Otherexamplesoffunctionaldevices:A)anenzymethatcatalyzesthetransformationofonesmallmoleculechemicalintoanother,B)excision of a drop-out sequence using Cre recombinase targeting loxP sites, C) constitutive expression of non-coding RNA using a U6 promoter, and D) CRISPR-basedgeneeditingwithconstitutiveexpressionofCas9andsgRNA. Biology,then,wewilldefineadeviceasafunctionthathasbeen device or a composite system, is a matter of identifying an associatedwithadefinitionofaninterfaceandacontextforits appropriatepartorsequence,andtypicallytherearemanythat operation. This information is sufficient to combine a device couldpotentiallyapply. together with others to implement a biological system (e.g., With sequence-centric engineering, characterization of a to sense some condition and report it via green fluorescence). parthastendedtoaskquestionsoftheform“Howdoesthispart Finally,thefunctionofthatsystemmaybeitselfdescribedand behave?” Given a functional definition of a device, however, a possiblyabstractedintoahigher-leveldevicebyidentifyingits fundamentallydifferentquestionneedstobeanswered:“Isthis interfaceandcontextforoperation. part’sbehaviorgoodenoughtobeanimplementationforthat To actually implement a device or system, of course, a device?”Thisquestioncannotbeansweredwithoutconsidering specific sequence must be identified. Typically there are many what“goodenough”meansintermsofthefunctionofadevice. sequencesthatmaysufficetoimplementanygivendevice.GFP, For example, a Green Fluorescence Reporter device turns forexample,atthetimeofthiswritinghas160differentamino transcriptional activity into a strong fluorescent signal. How acid sequences on FPbase (19). Reverse translation of any of strongisstrongenough?Theanswerisdeterminedbythesignal these amino acid sequences further produces myriad distinct strength required to discriminate various levels of expression nucleic acid sequences, all of which encode the same amino from background with a given class of instrument (e.g., plate acid sequence. These alternatives are not identical, of course, reader or flow cytometer), which in turn determines the andlikelysomewillnotbefunctionalatall.Still,agreatmany flexibility of the specifications for the device instantiation, areexpectedtobesufficientlygoodimplementationsofaGreen i.e., what types and degrees of imperfections can be tolerated. FluorescenceReporterdevice. Devicecontextmustalsoberecordedinthespecification,asany As with devices, we often need to combine sequences GFPcodingsequencewillfailtoproducestrongfluorescenceif together with other sequences in order to form the composites itisplacedinthewrongoperationalcontext(e.g.,inanaerobic that implement systems, whether through assembly protocols conditions,withanincompatible5’UTR,orinanincompatible or by directly synthesizing the composite sequence. The right host). Useful device specifications thus require at least some half of Figure 1 shows this parallel abstraction hierarchy, in predictionsaboutdevicebehavior. whichapartisdefinedasasequencethathasbeenassociated There is an inherent tension and interplay between with a definition of a build interface, parts combine to form predictability and flexibility. Any device can be made composites, and those composites may in turn be abstracted impossible to realize by making its specification require too intohigher-levelparts. much precision and/or too great an operational range, e.g., Thisapproachtodefiningfunctionaldevicescanbeapplied lookingforaGreenFluorescenceReporterthatalwaysproduces toanywell-describedbiologicalfunction:Figure2showsother exactly the same number of molecules in wildly different cell examplesoffunctionaldevices,someofwhichwouldnecessarily types. Likewise, a device can be rendered inoperable if the needtobeimplementedusingmultipleparts. constraints placed on values are too lax (e.g., accepting a red Indeed,thisseparatedhierarchyisde factowhatisalready fluorescent protein as a legitimate implementation of a Green in informal use throughout much of the community. From Fluorescence Reporter) or if the operational range applied is whiteboards to journal articles, synthetic biologists typically too tightly constrained (e.g., predicting that the device will communicate in terms of function. Sequences, meanwhile, work only in the exact construct where it was characterized). are often selected arbitrarily or inherited from prior projects Success in designing and building engineered systems depends via a shared laboratory freezer, and in publications are on finding a middle ground where practitioners are readily typically relegated to supplementary information or even— able both to find devices and parts to realize a system and problematically—entirely omitted (24). Functional Synthetic also to predict the outcome that system will generate with a Biology proposes that we recognize this distinction and the satisfactorydegreeofreliabilityandaccuracy. separation between sequence and function, then explore its Thereislikewiseatensionbetweenthesegoalsandthedesire consequences in order to improve our representations, tooling, toobtainthebestperformancefromadevice. Forexample, in engineeringapproaches,andcollaborationstrategies. selectingaparttorealizeaGreenFluorescenceReporterdevice, it may be desirable to select a less bright GFP variant that is betterunderstood(thusmorepredictable),knowntooperatein awiderrangeoforganisms,oravailableinapreferredassembly Predictability and Flexibility format. Ultimately, this is a matter of trust and focus: the The importance of predictability and flexibility as design morethatapractitionercantrustthepredictabilityoftheless requirementsisheightenedwhenadevice’sfunctionaldefinition interesting parts of their system (e.g., the Green Fluorescence isdivorcedfromitsrealizationasacompositeofdiscreteparts. Reporter),themorethattheycanfocusontheirprimarygoals Implementation of a function, whether at the level of a single 4 Aldulijan et al. 1. Curate GFP 2. Publish 3. Use ntri b ute E. coli o C User 4. GFP contributions from 4. BioBrickE. coli Fluorescent atgcgtaaaggag... Reporters 5. Review MoCloS. cerevisiae atgcgtaacttcg... 7. Republish 8.