functional provide simply by updating their copy of the collection to the characteristicsofthenewlyrecommendedpartcanbeassessed latestversion. to remain within the range of predictability that has been When implemented well, the transparency and checking in established for the Green Fluorescence Reporter device, any such processes can help build trust within a community of systemusingthedeviceshouldbeabletobesafelyupdatedto users and maintainers. The mechanisms of distributed version usethenewpart.Indeed,suchanupgraderecommendationcan controlalsohelptosustainanopenmarketplaceforcompetition alreadybefoundinthescientificliteratureforredfluorescence, betweenpackagesofinformationandtheirattendantprocesses when the developers of mCherry suggested phasing out and maintainers. Just as in the software world, Functional its predecessor, mRFP1, given mCherry’s improved “higher Synthetic Biology packages will compete not just on the basis extinction coefficient ..., tolerance of N-terminal fusions and of technical efficacy, but also their trustworthiness, reliability, photostability.”(29) easeofuse,andresponsivenesstouserneeds. Assessing the potential impact from a change to a part or device, however, is often not clear-cut or straightforward. If a model is not sufficiently accurate, there is a risk that changes A Roadmap to Functional Synthetic Biology assessed as safe will instead produce unwanted side-effects or even result in a system-wide degradation. This risk from In this section, we propose a multi-year roadmap for realizing adoptingarecommendation,however,mustbebalancedagainst thevisionforFunctionalSyntheticBiologysetoutabove.This the risk and costs associated with ignoring a recommendation roadmap foregrounds the vision’s most consequential aspects from experts who are likely to be more familiar with the andspecifiesthetimeframeswithinwhichwepredictthatthese specialized matter at hand and better able to sort through aspectscanreasonablybeachieved(Figure4). themyriadpossibleimplementationsofthedevice.Ultimately, Some aspects of the vision that the roadmap accounts for then, this is a question of building trust around changes to are well-defined and can be achieved with technologies and complexsystemswithimplicationsthataredifficulttopredict. techniques that are available today. They simply need to be Thesoftwareengineeringcommunityhasfacedaverysimilar adaptedandapplied.Forexample,anintegratedrepresentation problem of managing technical risk and building trust around of the part and device hierarchies from Figure 1 can already changes with difficult-to-predict systems implications. That be implemented using the SBOL 2 (26) or SBOL 3 (21) community has addressed its analogous challenge with a now- standards. Alternatively, devices could also be represented mature ecosystem of tools and collaborative processes (often withamodelinglanguagesuchasSBML(15), thenassociated collected under the name “agile software development”) for with parts represented in GenBank or GFF. In either case, a managingthedevelopmentofcomplexsystems. modern version control system such as git can be employed Foundational to these processes are distributed version to manage and disseminate the genetic design files generated. control systems (e.g., git) that afford communities of experts Another advantage of such a version control system is that a convenient way to organize, share, and maintain packages it supports mature agile software workflows (e.g., trunk-based of information. These are already used in the bioinformatic development) and tooling (e.g., continuous integration) that community to manage knowledge collections such as the fostercollaborationandenablequalitycontrolautomation. Systems Biology Ontology (SBO), Sequence Ontology (SO), Short term targets for development include basic parts andGeneOntology(GO). such as constitutive promoters, terminators, sensors, and Functional Synthetic Biology can take advantage of reporters, as well as regulatory insulation (e.g., (20; 22; 7)) these same mechanisms to curate collections of devices, and families of transcriptional computing devices (e.g., (5; collaborativelymaintainthem,andreducetechnicalriskrelated 16; 23; 13; 8)). Developing a collection of design packages to updating these collections. Figure 3 illustrates the type of coveringtheseelements,alongwithfunction-centricdesignand interactions that can be enabled. In this vision, an expert build tools, should enable routine engineering of 2-3 device curatesadevicesuchasaGreenFluorescenceReporter,along sense/compute/actuate circuits in model microbes and cellwith options for implementing the device using one of several free systems. The core packages that result from these initial parts containing a coding sequence for GFP. This device is engineeringinitiativescanbemadeavailablethroughacentral aggregated with others into a fluorescent reporters collection, repository serving as a rendezvous point for early adopters to which can be published as a package in a catalog where it can discoverandmakeuseofthesepackages. besharedwithothersyntheticbiologists. As this Functional Synthetic Biology ecosystem matures In the course of applying the device in various contexts, and expands, practitioners will undoubtedly enhance the synthetic biologists will undoubtedly identify ways to improve performance, flexibility, and reliability of the parts, will add 6 Aldulijan et al. Immediate (1 -2 years) Short Term (2 -4 years) Medium Term (3 -5 years) Long Term (5 -10 years) Version control of biological designs Software Function-centric design and build tools Genetic design packages Automation of part selection Support Central package repository Device representation in SBOL3 Predictability Agile biological design workflows Devices operate in multiple organisms Device insulation from 5’/3’ context Broad context devices & Flexibility Automated part & device quality control Characterization of context & usability Scope of Routine creation of 2-3 device systems Routine creation of 4-6 device systems Routine creation of 10+device systems Systems Operation in model microbes & cell-free Operation in non-model microbes Operation in multicellular organisms Adoption Core packages used by early adopters Communities share data via packages Broad adoption of Functional SynBio Fig.4.Suggestedroadmapofgoals,fromimmediatetolong-term,forachievingFunctionalSyntheticBiology. new packages focused on their own areas of interest, and sequencesthatdefinesthefieldtodaytoafocusonfunctionality will expand the functionality of existing packages by making thatwilltransformthewaysyntheticbiologyispracticedinthe incrementalupgradestothem.Thecomplexityofsystemsthat future.Thisrepresentsacriticalstepforwardalongthepathto