et al, 2022). In real-time intrusion detection, computer networks detection systems must be able to detect new forms of cyberattacks as they appear, so the classification models used must be able to adapt to changes in the data distribution over time (Nixon et al, 2021). This scenario would fall into this category because the data stream is constantly changing, and the model must be able to adapt to changes in the data distribution over time to maintain high accuracy. 3. Evolving fuzzy system approaches. These approaches are based on a type of fuzzy system that can adapt and changeovertime,inresponsetonewdataorchangesintheenvironment(Guetal,2023).Intraditionalfuzzy systems, the rules and membership functions that define the system are fixed and do not change over time. Evolving fuzzy systems, on the other hand, are able to adapt their rules and membership functions based on new data or changes in the environment. This is particularly useful in applications where the data or the environment is non-stationary and evolves over time, such as in control systems for autonomous vehicles, where we must be able to adapt to changes in the environment, such as traffic patterns, road conditions, and weather (Naranjo et al, 2007; Wang et al, 2015). 4. Experimental design and bandit approaches. These methods, mostly related to regression models, actively select the most informative data points to improve model predictions. This category includes online active linear regression and sequential decision-making strategies like bandit algorithms or reinforcement learning. These methods adaptively select the most promising options in a given situation. An example is given by online advertising, where a model is used to select the most promising advertisements to display to users based on their browsing history and other factors (Avadhanula et al, 2021). This scenario would fall into this category because the model must adaptively select the most promising options in real-time based on the information available at that time. Also, in clinical trials, a model is used to select the most promising patients to enroll in a clinical trial based on their medical history and other personal information. Finally, in drug development studies (R´eda et al, 2020), online active learning can be used to select the most promising compounds for further testing and development, based on their potential efficacy and safety. This categorization provides a comprehensive overview of the different types of online active learning strategies andhowtheycanbeappliedinvariousscenarios.Whilethesimplestactivelearningstrategy,randomsampling, is available and involves selecting data points randomly from the stream for annotation, we will primarily focus onmorespecializedstrategiesdesignedtoaddressscenarioswhereinformeddecisionsarecrucialduetoresource constraints or where the data distribution is non-stationary. Figure 5 depicts a general framework illustrating the essential components shared by the various categories ofonlineactivelearningalgorithms.Theaccompanyingcalloutshighlightkeyoptionsutilizedbythesemethods. Thefollowingsectionswillprovideanin-depthanalysisofthesestrategies.Foramoredetailedflowchartregarding the drift detection and adaptation process, please refer to Lu et al (2018); Lima et al (2022). 3.1 Stationary data stream classification approaches In online active learning, a commonly employed strategy is to request labels for data points that are considered to be informative enough based on a pre-determined threshold. This threshold can be established through a variety of techniques, depending on the instance selection criterion used to evaluate the informativeness of the unlabeled observations. Another method, sometimes referred to as b-sampling, is to calculate the probability that a data point will be queried by adjusting the parameter of a Bernoulli random variable, as proposed by Cesa-Bianchi et al. in one of the pioneering studies on online active learning (Cesa-Bianchi et al, 2004, 2006). Theyusedalinearpredictorcharacterizedbytheweightvectorw∈Rd and,ateachtimestept,afterobserving the current data point x , the binary output y ∈{−1,+1} is predicted using t y =SGN (cid:0) w⊤ x (cid:1) (1) (cid:98)t t−1 t 8 - Classification - Uncertainty - Single model - Single pass - Thresholding - Regression - Diversity - Ensemble - Batch - 𝑏-sampling - … - … Data Instance Instance Sampling Model stream evaluation selection strategy No Drifting Model update data? Yes - Re-training - Incremental - Batch-mode Drift adaptation Drift detection - Adjust sampling rate - DDM - Replace model - ADWIN - Change ensemble weights - … - … Fig. 5 Onlineactivelearning:generalframework. where w is the weight vector estimated with the previously seen labeled examples (x ,y ),...,(x ,y ). t−1 1 1 t−1 t−1 The value w⊤ x is the margin, p , of w on the instance x . If the learner queries the label y , a new weight t−1 t (cid:98)t t−1 t t vector is estimated using the newly added labeled example (x ,y ) with the regular perceptron update rule t t (Rosenblatt, 1958) as in w =w +M y x (2) t t−1 t t t where M represents the indicator function of the event y ̸=y . If the label is not requested, the model remains t (cid:98)t t unchanged, and we have w = w . At each time step t, the learner decides whether to query the label of a t t−1 data point x by