Active learning for data streams: a survey Davide Cacciarelli1,2* and Murat Kulahci1,3 1Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark. 2Department of Mathematical Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway. 3Department of Business Administration, Technology and Social Sciences, Lule˚a University of Technology, Lule˚a, Sweden. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): dcac@dtu.dk; Abstract Online active learning is a paradigm in machine learning that aims to select the most informative data points to label from a data stream. The problem of minimizing the cost associated with collecting labeled observationshasgainedalotofattentioninrecentyears,particularlyinreal-worldapplicationswheredatais onlyavailableinanunlabeledform.Annotatingeachobservationcanbetime-consumingandcostly,making it difficult to obtain large amounts of labeled data. To overcome this issue, many active learning strategies have been proposed in the last decades, aiming to select the most informative observations for labeling in order to improve the performance of machine learning models. These approaches can be broadly divided into two categories: static pool-based and stream-based active learning. Pool-based active learning involves selecting a subset of observations from a closed pool of unlabeled data, and it has been the focus of many surveys and literature reviews. However, the growing availability of data streams has led to an increase in the number of approaches that focus on online active learning, which involves continuously selecting and labeling observations as they arrive in a stream. This work aims to provide an overview of the most recently proposed approaches for selecting the most informative observations from data streams in real time. We reviewthevarioustechniquesthathavebeenproposedanddiscusstheirstrengthsandlimitations,aswellas the challenges and opportunities that exist in this area of research. Keywords:stream-basedactivelearning;onlineactivelearning;datastreams;onlinelearning;unlabeleddata;query strategies;selectivesampling;conceptdrift;experimentaldesign;bandits. 1 Introduction The deployment of machine learning models in real-world applications is often reliant on the availability of significant amounts of annotated data. While recent advancements in sensor technology have facilitated the collectionoflargeramountsofdata,thisdataisnotalwayslabeledandreadyforuseintrainingmodels.Indeed, the process of obtaining labeled observations for supervised learning models can be cost-prohibitive and timeconsuming, as it often requires quality inspections or manual annotation. In such cases, active learning proves to be a valuable strategy to identify the most informative data points for use in training, thereby reducing the overallcostoflabelingandimprovingtheperformanceofthemodel.Overtheyears,aplethoraofactivelearning approaches have been proposed in the literature, each with its own benefits and limitations. These approaches seektostrikeabalancebetweenthecostoflabelingandthequalityofthemodelbyselectivelychoosingthemost informative observations for querying. By carefully selecting the most informative observations, active learning helps to minimize the amount of labeled data required and streamlines the learning process, contributing to its overall efficiency. Published in Machine Learning by Springer (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-023-06454-2 3202 voN 92 ]LM.tats[ 4v39880.2032:viXra Whileseveralsurveyshavebeenpublishedonpool-basedactivelearning(Aggarwaletal,2014;Settles,2009; Fu et al, 2013; Kumar and Gupta, 2020), which involves selecting a fixed set of observations from a pool of unlabeled data, the dynamic and sequential nature of many real-world problems often renders these approaches impractical. This has led to growing interest in the online variant of active learning, also referred to as streambasedactivelearning,whichinvolvescontinuouslyselectingandlabelingobservationsastheyarriveinastream, allowing for real-time adaptation to changing data distributions. Lughofer (2017) provided a review of online active learning approaches with a focus on fuzzy models. However, since its publication, numerous other online active learning approaches have been proposed, and to the best of our knowledge, no other surveys have been published to synthesize these developments. Moreover, surveys purely focusing on online learning from data streams (Lu et al, 2018; Tieppo et al, 2022; Lima et al, 2022; Hoi et al, 2021) discuss methods that assume a completeavailabilityoflabels,whichisnotthecaseinmanyreal-worldapplications.Theaimofthisreviewisto fill this gap by providing a comprehensive overview 1 of the most recently developed query strategies for online active learning. It is worth noting that in certain cases, stream-based active learning is narrowly defined as the act of selecting the most informative observations from a data stream to fit a predictive model. Instead, the act of determining which observations to query while making predictions is referred to as online selective sampling (HannekeandYang,2021).Inthiswork,wecoverandexamineallthemethodsthataddressthecrucialproblem ofselectingthemostinformativedatapointstolabelfromadatastreaminanonlinefashion.Wewillpresentthe techniques that have been proposed so far, discussing their strengths and limitations, as well as the challenges and opportunities that exist in this field. In addition, we will provide an overview of evaluation strategies for online active learning algorithms and highlight some real-world applications. Finally, we will identify potential future research directions in this area. Thissurveycomprehensivelyexploresvariousfacetsofactivelearning,encompassingboththeoreticalfoundations and practical challenges. By delving into this review, we aim to shed light on pertinent research questions, including: 1. Querystrategy.Whatsamplingstrategyshouldbeusedtomaximizelearningefficiencyinastreamingcontext? 2. Timing of queries. When and how often should data points be queried to balance learning and resource constraints? 3. Model updates. When should predictive models be updated and how can they adapt to changing data distributions and concept drift? 4. Scalability. How can active learning methods be made scalable and efficient for high-velocity data streams? 5. Evaluation. What are appropriate evaluation metrics for assessing the performance of stream-based active learning algorithms? The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, we provide an overview of active learning, including the main instance selection criteria, an overview of the main active learning scenarios, and the connection between active learning