Hao et al (2018a) in the formulation of the AEWAF N (cid:88) (cid:16) (cid:17) max v (cid:98)i,t ℓ f(cid:98)i,t (x t ),f(cid:98)j,t (x t ) ≤δ (29) 1≤j≤N i=1 3.2 Drifting data stream classification approaches Activelearningstrategiesbelongingtothiscategoryaimtotackleonlineclassificationtasksintime-varyingdata streams affected by distribution shifts. We can classify distribution shifts into three main categories, depending on whether they concern the feature space x or the output dimension y. A shift that only affects the input distributionp(x),andnottheconditionaldistributionp(y |x),isreferredtoascovariateshift(Zhouetal,2021; Wu et al, 2021; Li et al, 2021) or virtual drift (Baier et al, 2021). In these circumstances, for two different time steps, t and t , we have that p (x) ̸= p (x) and p (y | x) = p (y | x), meaning that the underlying i i+∆ ti ti+∆ ti ti+∆ model is not being altered by phenomena like class swaps or coefficient changes. Conversely, in the presence of a real concept drift (Baier et al, 2021; Su´arez-Cetrulo et al, 2023), the conditional distribution changes, and we have p (y | x) ̸= p (y | x). In this scenario, the predictive performance of the fitted model dramatically ti ti+∆ deteriorates, and a model update or replacement becomes necessary. An example of this kind of distribution shift can be identified in the changes of the consumer behaviors over time, or following a major event as the COVID-19 pandemic (Zwanka and Buff, 2021). However, it should be noted that virtual drifts and real concept drifts often occur together (Tsymbal et al, 2008), leading to a situation where we have both p (x) ̸= p (x) ti ti+∆ and p (y |x)̸=p (y |x) (Lu et al, 2018). Lastly, we can incur in a label distribution shift (Wu et al, 2021) ti ti+∆ when the shift only affects p(y), leading to p (y)̸=p (y). This situation can be observed in many real-world ti ti+∆ scenarios where the target distribution changes over time. A typical example is the prediction of diseases like influenza, whose distribution can dramatically change depending on the season, or in the presence of sudden outbreaks. Another key characteristic of distribution shifts is represented by the change rate, namely how fast the new concept or distribution is introduced into the data stream. To this extent, we can identify four kinds of drifts (Lu et al, 2018; Lima et al, 2022), which are illustrated in Figure 7. A sudden or abrupt drift is a drift that can be immediately detected from two consecutive time steps, t and t . It refers to a sudden and clearly i i+1 identifiablechangeinthedatadistribution.Anexampleofthiswouldbeasuddenchangeintheweather,which would affect the behavior of customers at a retail store. The change is noticeable, and the model needs to be updated immediately. A gradual drift exhibits a transition phase, where a mixture or overlap between the two distributions p and p exists. In this case, the change is slower and more difficult to detect, making it ti ti+∆ 16 challenging to update the model. An example would be a change in consumer behavior over time, which is hard to detect but can have a significant impact on a business. Another type of drift is the incremental drift, which has an extremely low transition rate, which makes it very difficult to detect changes between the data points observed in the transition period. This type of drift is often caused by changes in the data generating process that happen gradually over time, in small steps rather than all at once. An example would be changes in the types of products that are popular among customers, which happen gradually and are hard to detect. Finally, a data stream can also be affected by recurring concepts, which sequentially alternate over time. An example would be a retail store where the same types of products are popular at different times of the year, such as winter coats and summer dresses. The model needs to be able to detect and adapt to these recurring concepts in order to maintain good performance. C C C C 2 2 2 2 C C C C 1 1 1 1 𝑡 𝑡 𝑡 𝑡 (a) (b) (c) (d) Fig. 7 Differenttypesofdriftsthatcanaffectthedatastream:abruptdrift(a),gradualdrift(b),incrementaldrift(c),recurring concepts(d).C1 andC2 indicatethetwoconceptsthatmightcharacterizethedatadistribution. In online active learning for drifting data streams, some approaches address the presence of concept drifts by combining active learning strategies with drift detectors (Zhang et al, 2020a; Krawczyk et al, 2018). Drift detectors are algorithms that try to detect distribution shifts and identify when the context is changing. They can be divided into three macro-categories (Lu et al, 2018). The first group of methods is represented by the error-baseddriftdetectors,whichtrytodetectonlinechangesintheerrorrateofabaseclassifier.Amongthese, one of the most commonly employed strategies is the drift detection method (DDM) proposed by Gama et al (2004). Another popular approach is the adaptive window (ADWIN) strategy proposed by Bifet and Gavald`a (2007). The second class of drift detectors