adding an element to a smaller set has a greater impact on the function value than adding the same element to a larger set. Adaptive submodular maximization allows the modeltoadapttothechangingdistributionofdataovertime,byadjustingthesetfunctiontoreflectthecurrent state of knowledge. This leads to more efficient use of available data and improved performance. So far, we discussed several single model approaches to active learning, which have shown promising results in various applications. However, it is important to note that single models have their limitations and can sometimesstruggletocapturecomplexpatternsanddiverserepresentationspresentinthedata.Toaddressthese limitations, researchers have proposed the use of ensembles or committees as an alternative (Krawczyk et al, 2017).Anensembleorcommitteereferstoagroupofmultiplemodelsthatcollaboratetoproduceamorerobust andaccuratepredictionbycombiningtheirindividualpredictions.Themodelsinanensembleorcommitteecan be trained on different subsets of the data or with varying hyperparameters, and the final prediction is typically madethrougheithervotingorweightedaveraging.Ensemblesorcommitteescanalsoberegardedasacollection ofmodelsthatworktogethertomakeaprediction,eitherbyexchanginginformationorlearningfromoneanother. Amongthisclassofmethods,acommonsamplingstrategyisrepresentedbydisagreement-basedactivelearning. Aframeworktoperformdisagreement-basedactivelearninginonlinesettingswasrecentlyintroducedbyHuang et al (2022). They characterized the learner by a hypothesis space H of Vapnik-Chervonenkis (VC) dimension d, which is composed of all the classifiers currently under consideration, and a Tsybakov noise model (Mammen andTsybakov,1999;Tsybakov,2004).Eachclassifierh∈Hisameasurablefunctionmappingtheobservationx t to binary output y ={0,1}. The disagreement among two classifiers is given by d(h ,h )=P[h (x)̸=h (x)] t 1 2 1 2 and the disagreement region is defined as D(h ,h )={x∈X :h (x)̸=h (x)} (16) 1 2 1 2 Theonlineactivelearningstrategyisrepresentedbythepolicyπ =({v },{λ }),where{v } isthemapofthe t t t t≥1 querieddatapoints,and{λ } isthesequenceofpredictionrules.OverthetimehorizonT,theperformanceof t t≥1 the policy π is evaluated using the label complexity and the regret. The label complexity measures the expected number of labels queried, with respect to the stochastic process induced by π, and it is given by (cid:34) T (cid:35) (cid:88) E[Q(T)]=E 1[v =1] (17) t t=1 The regret, on the other hand, represents the expected number of excess classification errors with respect to h∗, and it is obtained as   (cid:88) E[R(T)]=E  1[λ t ̸=y t ]−1[h∗(x t )̸=y t ] (18) t≤T:vt=0 The objective of the algorithm is to minimize the label complexity with a constraint on the regret. At the first round, the initial version space is the entire hypothesis space H, while the initial region of disagreement is the wholeinputspaceX.Then,attimestept,thelearnerupdatestheversionspaceH usingtheM collectedlabels, t and computes a new region of disagreement as D(H )={x∈X :∃h ,h ∈H ,h (x)̸=h (x)} (19) t 1 2 t 1 2 If x ∈ D(H ), then the label of the current data point is queried, otherwise a prediction is produced using t t an arbitrary classifier in H . At the end of the iteration t, the set Z of M collected labeled examples is used t t to estimate the empirical error ϵ (h) of the classifiers in H and identify the best currently available classifier. Zt Then,theversionspaceisupdatedbyremovingallthesuboptimalhypotheseswhoseempiricalerrorexceedsthe one obtained with h∗ by a threshold ∆ (h,h∗). The threshold regulates the trade-off between reducing label t Zt t complexity by narrowing the region of disagreement and increasing the regret by eliminating good classifiers. The disagreement concept was also used by Desalvo et al (2021), while proposing an approach to online active learning for binary classification tasks based on surrogate losses. The overall framework is similar to 13 the disagreement-based one used by Huang et al (2022), with the main difference being the use of weak-labels to optimize the sampling strategy. At each time step t, the learner observes the unlabeled data point x and t either decides to request its label or assigns a pseudo-label y . Then, the pseudo labels y and the true labels (cid:98)t (cid:98)t y processed so far are used together to obtain an estimate of the empirical risk ϵ (h), where S is obtained t St t by combining the collected labeled examples Z t with the pseudo-labeled ones Z(cid:98)t . This represents an example of combining active learning and semi-supervised learning, as highlighted in Section 2.3. Loy et al (2012) presented a Bayesian framework that leverages the principle of committee consensus to balanceexplorationandexploitationinonlineactivelearning.Theaimofexplorationistodiscovernew,previously unknown classes, while exploitation focuses on refining the decision boundary for known classes. To address the issueofunknownclasses,theframeworkusesaPitman-YorProcesses(PYP)priormodel(PitmanandYor,1997) with a Dirichlet process mixture model (DPMM). A DPMM is a non-parametric clustering and classification model that models the data generating process using a mixture of probability distributions. Each data point is assignedtoacluster,whichisassociatedwithaprobabilitydistributionovertheclasses.Thenumberofclusters ismodeledusingaDirichletprocess,whichisadistributionoverdistributionsthatallowsforaninfinitenumber ofclustersbutensuresthatthenumberofactualclustersisalwaysfinite.Ateachtimestept,thelearnersamples two random hypotheses h and h from the model. Then, it computes the posterior probability of the current 1 2 class c corresponding to k, p(c=k |x ), for each of the two hypotheses. Finally, h (x ) = argmaxp(c|x ) is t i t t calculated for i = 1,2. The label of the current data point is queried in two cases: first, if h (x ) ̸= h (x ), 1 t 2 t meaning the two hypotheses disagree, and second, if h (x ) = K +1∀i, where K is the number of currently i t known classes, meaning the current data point belongs to a new class. The DPMM has also been used