unnecessary as the model would have predicted therightlabel.Thecontextualbanditproblemisimplementedbybuildinganensembleofdifferentmodels,with each expert suggesting whether to query or not based on whether its prediction certainty exceeds a threshold Γ. The models are assigned a decision power based on how past suggestions were rewarded and how coherent they were with the other experts’ suggestions. When an observation is sent to the oracle for labeling, the reward is computed, and the objective function of the learner is to maximize the total reward over a time horizon T. Another reinforcement learning-based approach has been proposed by Woodward and Finn (2017). They considered the case where at each time step t the learner needs to decide whether to predict the label of the unlabeled data point x or pay to request its label y . The reinforcement learning framework is used to find an t t optimal policy π∗(s ) that takes into account the cost of asking for a label and the cost of making an incorrect t prediction, where s represents the state that is given in input at the timet to a policy π(s ) that outputs the t t suggestedactiona .Theauthorsapproximatetheaction-valuefunctionusingalongshort-termmemory(LSTM) t neuralnetworkwithalinearoutputlayer.Theoptimalpolicyisdeterminedbymaximizingthelong-termreward, after assigning a reward to a label request R , a correct prediction R , and an incorrect prediction R . It req corr inc should be noted that R and R should be negative rewards, as they are associated with costly actions. corr inc 4 Evaluation strategies The use of active learning approaches is becoming increasingly common in machine learning, allowing models to be trained more efficiently by selecting the most informative examples for labeling. To evaluate the performance of theseapproaches, itis typical tocompare themto a passiverandom samplingstrategy by generatinglearning curves that plot the model performance (e.g., accuracy, F1 score, or root mean square error) on a holdout test set over the number of labeled examples used for training. Learning curves are a useful tool for comparing the asymptotic performance of different strategies and their sample efficiency, with the slope of the curve reflecting therateatwhichthemodelperformanceimproveswithadditionallabeledexamples.Asteeperslopeindicatesa moresample-efficientstrategy.Whenmultiplesamplingstrategiesarebeingcompared,avisualinspectionofthe learning curves may not be sufficient, and more rigorous statistical tests may be necessary. Reyes et al (2018) recommend the use of non-parametric statistical tests to analyze the effectiveness of active learning strategies for classification tasks. The sign test (Steel, 1959) or the Wilkinson signed-ranks test (Wilcoxon, 1945) can be used to compare two strategies, while the Friedman test (Friedman, 1940), the Friedman aligned-ranks test (Hodges and Lehmann, 1962), the Friedman test with Iman-Davenport correction (Iman and Davenport, 1980), or the Quade test (Quade, 1979) can be used when evaluating more than two strategies. These statistical tests can provide insight into whether the difference in performance between the active learning and passive random sampling strategies is statistically significant. Algorithm 6 Prequential evaluation for online active learning Require: an initial model w , a data stream S, a budget B, an active learning strategy Q. 0 t←1 ▷ Timestamp P←∅ ▷ Storing predictions while c≤B and i≤|S| do Observe the data point x ∈S t Predict the label y and store it: P←P∪y (cid:98)t (cid:98)t if Q(x )=True then ▷ Sampling decision t Ask for the true label y and update the model t c←c+1 ▷ Pay for the label else Discard x t end if t←t+1 end while 28 Overall, the use of learning curves and statistical tests can provide valuable insights into the effectiveness and efficiency of different active learning strategies. By understanding the statistical significance of differences in performance between these strategies, researchers can make informed decisions about which approaches are more effective for a particular task or dataset. Furthermore, the choice of the evaluation scheme is crucial when assessing the performance of active learning approaches. If we use an evaluation scheme based on a holdout test set, at each learning step t the performance of the model is assessed using the same test set. This can be a reasonable approach if we are dealing with a stationary data stream, which does not evolve over time. Under these assumptions, using the same test set we might be able to better assess the prediction improvement as more labeled examples are included in the design. However, this approach might not be ideal when dealing with drifting data streams. In these circumstances, a prequential evaluation scheme can be more useful to monitor the evolution of the prediction error over time (Su´arez-Cetrulo et al, 2021; Cerqueira et al, 2020; Tieppo et al, 2022; Cacciarelli and Boresta, 2021). In online learning, prequential evaluation is also referred to as test-thentrain approach, and it involves using each incoming instance first to measure the prediction error, and then to be included in the training set (Su´arez-Cetrulo et al, 2023). The main steps of the test-then-train approach are reportedinAlgorithm6.Thekeyideaisthatateachtimestept,wefirsttestthemodelbymakingaprediction, then we decide whether to query the true labels and finally