then selected to be labeled by an oracle. Regardless of the particular query strategy being employed, these macro scenarios provide a framework for understanding the flow of information and the decision-makingstepsinvolvedinactivelearning.Thesescenariosserveasahigh-levelcategorizationofdifferent methods for approaching the active learning problem, each with its own set of advantages and disadvantages depending on the specific use case. Understanding these macro scenarios is crucial for selecting the appropriate active learning technique for a particular problem and for comparing different active learning algorithms. In the next subsections, each of the three macro scenarios will be discussed. 2.2.1 Membership query synthesis active learning Thisscenariorepresentsthecasewhenthelearnerisgivencompletefreedomtoaskforthelabelofanydatapoint belongingtotheinputspaceorforasyntheticallygeneratedone.Someexamplesofmembershipquerysynthesis active learning include image classification, where the learner can generate modified versions of existing images to be labeled, or object detection, where the learner can generate new instances by combining and transforming existing instances. In natural language processing (NLP) tasks such as text classification or sentiment analysis, the learner might generate synthetic examples in the form of sentences or paragraphs that cover a wider range of variations in the language. Also, in speech recognition, the learner might generate synthetic speech samples in different accents, pronunciations, or speaking styles in order to improve the recognition accuracy. However, as highlighted by Baum and Lang (1992) and Settles (2009), the main drawback of this strategy is that it could generate unlabeled examples for which no labels can be associated by a human annotator (e.g., a mixture between a number and a letter). A general flowchart for this scenario is reported in Figure 1, where the scheme is repeated until a budget constraint on the requested labels is met, or a stopping criterion on the achieved performance is satisfied. 3 Synthetically Train/update Labeled data model Model generate instance(s) Ask for the label(s) Fig. 1 Membershipquerysynthesisactivelearning. In the context of deep active learning (Ren et al, 2022), the membership query synthesis scenario can be addressed by using generative models. For instance, generative adversarial networks (GANs) have been used to generate additional instances from the input space that may provide more informative labels for the learner (Goodfellow et al, 2014). This can be done by using GANs for data augmentation, as GANs are capable of generatingdiverseandhigh-qualityinstances(ZhuandBento,2017).Anotherapproachistocombinetheuseof variationalautoencoders(VAEs)(KingmaandWelling,2013)andBayesiandataaugmentation,asdemonstrated by Tran et al. (Tran et al, 2019, 2017). The authors used VAEs to generate instances from the disagreement regionsbetweenmultiplemodels,andBayesiandataaugmentationtoincorporatetheuncertaintyofthegenerated instances in the learning process. 2.2.2 Pool-based active learning Pool-based active learning is one of the most widely studied scenarios in the machine learning literature. The goal is to select the most informative subset of observations from a closed, static set of unlabeled data points. The majority of the proposed pool-based active learning approaches have been developed for classification tasks (Cai et al, 2013), with image classification being a common application in computer vision (Li and Guo, 2013), as manually labeling large image datasets can be a challenging task. Unlabeled Rank Select top 𝑘 Ask for the observations instance(s) label(s) data Train/update Model model Labeled data Fig. 2 Pool-basedactivelearning. The flowchart in Figure 2 provides an overview of pool-based active learning sampling schemes, where k representsthenumberofunlabeledinstanceswhoselabelisqueriedateachround.Traditionalmachinelearning models that do not require substantial computational resources to train are typically associated with a choice of k equal to one (Vahdat et al, 2019). This allows a timely update of the instance selection criteria, avoiding the redundant labeling of similar data points. However, larger values of k have also been used in practice, such as the analysis performed by Ge (2014) for values ranging from 5 to 30 or the approach used by Cai et al (2013) to add 3% of the total number of observations to the training set each time. Using a higher k value may be more practical when working with large models, as repeated training can be computationally expensive and challenging.Tothisextent,batchmodeactivelearningisgenerallyconsideredtobeamoreefficientandeffective option for image classification or detection tasks compared to the one-by-one query strategy, as the latter can be resource-intensive and time-consuming when working with large neural networks (Ren et al, 2022). This is because re-training the model with just one new data point with high input dimensionality may not result in significant improvement (Ren et al, 2022). In general, the choice of k may be problem- or model-specific, as it represents a trade-off between computational efficiency and the risk of querying redundant labels. Toenhancepool-basedactivelearning,manyapproachescombineuncertainty-basedinstanceselectioncriteria with acquisition functions such as entropy (Shannon, 1948; Wu et al, 2022), mutual information (Haussmann 4 et al, 2020), or variation ratio (Schmidt et al, 2020). Entropy is commonly used as an acquisition function in active learning because it provides a way to measure the uncertainty of the model predictions for a given data point. The entropy of a probability distribution is a measure of the amount of disorder or randomness in the distribution. In the context of active learning, the entropy of a model’s predicted class probabilities for a data point can be used