address the presence of concept drifts by combining active learning strategies with drift detectors (Zhang et al, 2020a; Krawczyk et al, 2018). Drift detectors are algorithms that try to detect distribution shifts and identify when the context is changing. They can be divided into three macro-categories (Lu et al, 2018). The first group of methods is represented by the error-baseddriftdetectors,whichtrytodetectonlinechangesintheerrorrateofabaseclassifier.Amongthese, one of the most commonly employed strategies is the drift detection method (DDM) proposed by Gama et al (2004). Another popular approach is the adaptive window (ADWIN) strategy proposed by Bifet and Gavald`a (2007). The second class of drift detectors is called data distribution-based drift detection, and the third class is represented bymultiple hypothesistesting strategies.Whilethe firstclass containsthe majority oftheproposed approaches, it assumes that we are able to observe the labels of all the incoming data points to assess the error rate.Instead,thelasttwoclassescouldbeimplementedeveninanunsupervisedmanner.Anexhaustiveoverview on unsupervised drift detection methods has been proposed by Gemaque et al (2020). While the unsupervised nature of the data distribution-based and multiple hypothesis testing strategies make them ideal for the active learningscenario,itshouldbenotedthatrealconceptdriftscanhardlybedetectedinacompletelyunsupervised fashion.Indeed,inacircumstancewhentheinputdistributionp(x)remainsunalteredwhiletheunderlyingmodel relating the input variables x to the label y changes, it would not be possible to detect the change of concept without collecting labels. This is why Krawczyk et al (2018) propose to apply an error-based drift detector to the few labels collected during the online active learning routine. To this extent, they use the ADWIN (Bifet andGavald`a,2007)methodtodetectdriftsanddecidewhenthecurrentmodelneedstobeupdatedorreplaced. The proposed general framework for dealing with online active learning with drifting data streams is reported in Algorithm 3. Moreover, the authors proposed the use of a time-variable threshold to balance the budget use over time. Their approach is based on the intuition that, when a new concept is introduced, more labeling effort will be required to quickly collect representative observations belonging to the new concept and replace the outdated model. This is obtained by adjusting a time-variable threshold to balance the budget use over time. Given a thresholdΓontheuncertaintyoftheclassifierandalabelingrateadjustmentr ∈[0,1],thethresholdisreduced to Γ−r when ADWIN raises a warning and to Γ−2r when a real drift is detected. Thus, when allocating the labelingbudget,thekeyrequirementisthatthelabelingrateemployedwhenadriftisdetectedshouldbestrictly larger than the one used in static conditions. A similar thresholding idea has also been used by Castellani et al (2022), who proposed an active learning strategy for non-stationary data streams in the presence of verification latency. They used a piece-wise constant budget function, where the labeling rate α is increased to α when high 17 Algorithm 3 Online active learning with drifting data streams Require: adatastreamS,aclassifierΘ,adriftdetectorΘ,asamplingstrategyΥ,alabelingrateα,asampling budget B. t←1 ▷ Timestamp c←0 ▷ Labeling cost while c≤B and t≤|S| do Observe incoming data point x ∈S t if Υ(x )=True then ▷ Sampling decision t Ask for the true label y t c←c+1 ▷ Pay for the label Update classifier Ψ with the labeled example (x ,y ) t t Update drift detector Θ with the labeled example (x ,y ) t t if drift warning =True then Start to train a new classifier Ψ new Increase labeling rate α else if drift detected =True then ▷ A detection is always preceded by a warning Replace C with C new Further increase α else Return to initial labeling rate α end if end if if C exists then ▷ Keeps being updated in the background until replacement new Update classifier C with the labeled example (x ,y ) new t t end if end if t←t+1 end while a drift is detected and, after a while, reduced to α . Finally, the labeling rate is restored to its nominal value low α. A visual representation of the labeling approach is shown in Figure 8. The length of the time segments where the labeling rate is altered depends on the desired values for α and α , constraining the overall labeling high low rate to be equal to α. 𝛼 )#*) 𝛼 𝛼 &'( 𝑡 𝑡 𝑡 𝑡 !"#$% "! "" Fig. 8 Piece-wiseconstantbudgetfunctionintroducedbyCastellanietal(2022).Thesamplingrateαisincreasedtoα when high adriftisdetected(t drift ),thenreducedtoα low betweentr1 andtr2 ,beforebeingrestoredtoitsnominalvalue. The authors also tackled the verification latency issue by considering the spatial information of a queried point for which the label has not been made available yet by the oracle. In this way, it is possible to avoid oversampling from regions where many close points have a high utility, namely a low classification confidence. While assessing the utility of the incoming data points the authors use real and pseudo-labels by propagating theinformationcontainedinthealreadylabeledobservations,assuggestedbyPhametal(2022).Theideaisto 18 use the spatial information of the queried labels by estimating the still missing labels with a weighted majority vote of the label of its k-nearest neighbors labels, where the weight for each nearest neighbor depends on the arrival time of the labels. The verification latency issue in online active learning with drifting data streams was also extensively analyzed by Pham et al (2022). Consider the general case where at time