strengths of both methods, it is possible to achieve better performance and more efficient learning compared to using either method alone. Semi-supervised learning approaches can be distinguished into three categories, unsupervised preprocessing, wrapper methods, and graph-based methods. Unsupervised preprocessing refers to the use of unsupervised learning techniques, such as dimensionality reduction (Cacciarelli and Kulahci, 2023), clustering, or feature extraction, to preprocess the entire dataset, labeled and unlabeled, before it is fed to the supervised model (Frumosu and Kulahci, 2018). The goal is to transform the data into a more useful representation that can be learned more easily by a supervised model and can support the sampling of more informative data points. This strategy can also help reduce the dimensionality of the learning problem, thus improving the model parameter estimation when only a few queries can be made. Related to the online active learning problem, Roˇzanec et al (2022)usedapre-trainednetworktoextractsalientfeaturesfromunlabeledimagesbeforestartingthesampling routine.Similarly,Cacciarellietal(2022a)usedanautoencodertrainedonalltheavailableunlabeleddatapoints to improve the performance of online active learning for linear regression models. Wrapper methods, on the other hand, use one or more supervised learners that are trained on labeled data and pseudo-labeled unlabeled data. There are two main variants of wrapper methods, self-training and cotraining. Self-training uses a single supervised model that is trained on labeled data, and pseudo-labels are used for the data points with confident predictions. Co-training, on the other hand, extends self-training to multiple supervised models, where two or more models exchange the most confident predictions to obtain pseudo-labels. Pseudo-labels can be very beneficial in label-scarce environments, but one must be mindful of the confirmation biasissue,wherethemodelmightrelyonincorrectself-createdlabels.Thisproblemhasbeenextensivelyanalyzed by Baykal et al (2022) in the active distillation scenario, which is a strategy where a smaller model, known as the student model, is trained to mimic the behavior of a larger pre-trained model, known as the teacher model (Hoang et al, 2021; Kwak et al, 2022). In this context, confirmatory bias refers to the student model tendency to reproduce the predictions of the teacher model, even when the teacher predictions are incorrect. This can happenwhenthestudentmodelistrainedtomimictheteachermodeloutputtooclosely,withoutconsideringthe underlying errors. To mitigate this, active distillation techniques use sample selection methods that encourage thestudentmodeltolearnfromdatapointswheretheteachermodelmakeserrors,ratherthanjustreproducing theteachermodelpredictions.Inthemoregeneralactivelearningframework,confirmationbiasmightalsorefer to the tendency of an active learning algorithm to select examples that confirm its current hypothesis, rather than selecting examples that would challenge or improve it. Finally, graph-based methods construct a graph on all available data and fit a supervised model, where the loss comprises a supervised loss and a regularization term that penalizes the difference between the labels predicted for connected data points. In the online active learning scenario, the graph structure can be used to model the similarity between data points, and the active learning algorithm can select the examples to label based on their position on the graph, such as selecting examples that are in low-density regions or are distant from other labeled examples. 3 Online active learning approaches In this review, we present a taxonomy of online active learning strategies into four categories: 1. Stationary data stream classification approaches. These methods are designed to tackle online classification tasks, where the model is updated on the fly using newly labeled examples selected from a stream of data that does not change significantly over time. These methods are particularly useful in scenarios where the datadistributionisrelativelystable,suchasqualitycontrolinindustrialprocesses,wherestationarityisoften ensured by control actions taken at regular intervals and continuous maintenance of the components of the 7 system (Bisgaard and Kulahci, 2011). Another example is represented by human activity recognition using wearable devices, where data is collected over time from wearable devices such as fitness trackers to identify patterns of activity like walking, running, or sleeping. This scenario would fall into this category because the data stream is relatively stable, and the model can be updated in real-time as new labeled examples become available (Miu et al, 2015). 2. Drifting data stream classification approaches. Theseonlineactivelearningstrategiesarespecificallydesigned tohandleclassificationtasksindynamicenvironmentswherethedatadistributionconstantlychanges.These approaches are designed to adapt to changes in the data distribution in order to maintain high classification accuracy. Some real-world applications might be fraud detection or intrusion detection. In financial fraud detection, fraudsters often change their methods to evade detection, so a classification model used for fraud detection must be able to adapt to new patterns of fraud as they emerge or to new customer habits (Zhang et al, 2022). In real-time intrusion detection, computer networks detection systems must be able to detect new forms of cyberattacks as they appear, so the classification models used must be able to adapt to changes in the data distribution over time (Nixon et al, 2021). This scenario would fall into this category because the data stream is constantly changing, and the model must be able to adapt to changes in the data distribution over time to maintain high accuracy. 3. Evolving fuzzy system approaches. These approaches are based on a type of fuzzy system that can adapt and changeovertime,inresponsetonewdataorchangesintheenvironment(Guetal,2023).Intraditionalfuzzy systems,