points be queried to balance learning and resource constraints? 3. Model updates. When should predictive models be updated and how can they adapt to changing data distributions and concept drift? 4. Scalability. How can active learning methods be made scalable and efficient for high-velocity data streams? 5. Evaluation. What are appropriate evaluation metrics for assessing the performance of stream-based active learning algorithms? The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, we provide an overview of active learning, including the main instance selection criteria, an overview of the main active learning scenarios, and the connection between active learning and semi-supervised learning. Section 3 represents the core of the review, with a brief overview of how online active learning approaches have been classified, followed by a detailed description of the state-of-the-art approaches. In Section 4, we examine evaluation strategies for online active learning algorithms. Section 5 highlights real-world applications and challenges. Section 6 provides a summary of the most common onlineactivelearningmethodsandhighlightspotentialdirectionsforfutureresearch.Finally,Section7provides conclusions and summarizes the key contributions of the review. 2 Preliminaries on active learning In supervised learning, we seek to learn a function that can predict the output variable, also known as response, given a set of input variables, also known as covariates. This function is often learned by training a model on a labeled dataset that consists of a large number of input-output pairs. However, obtaining labeled examples is notalwaysstraightforward,anditmaynotbepossibleorpracticaltolabelalltheavailabledata.Inthesecases, active learning can be used to select a subset of the data for labeling in order to improve the performance of the model, when there is a budget constraint on the number of unlabeled observations that can be queried. Indeed, there are many examples of how a classification or regression model can achieve a performance that is similar to what can be achieved when all the labels are available, using only a small fraction of the available observations. 1WeconductedasearchonSCOPUSandGoogleScholarusingthefollowingkeywords:”on-lineactivelearning”,”onlineactivelearning”, ”stream-based active learning”, ”single pass active learning”, ”online selective sampling”, ”sequential selective sampling”, and ”active learning” combined with ”data stream”. Each paper was reviewed individually to determine its relevance to online active learning. We eliminatedirrelevantpapersandmanuallyaddedsomepapersthatdidnotcontainthesekeywordsbutusedonlineactivelearningmethods orwererelevanttoourdiscussion.Additionally,weincludedrelatedpapersthatwerenecessarytounderstandthebiggerpicturefromthe referencesofthereviewedstrategies. 2 2.1 Instance selection criteria The main challenge in active learning is deciding which data points to label. There are many strategies for selecting data points in active learning, and most of them can be associated with one of these groups: • Uncertainty-based query strategies. These approaches focus on selecting data points that the model is least confident about, in order to reduce its uncertainty (Lu et al, 2016; Tong and Koller, 2002). When using classification models, the most widely used is the margin-based query strategy, where data points close to the decision boundary are selected (Roth and Small, 2006; Balcan et al, 2007). • Expected error or variance minimization. Thesestrategiesestimatethefutureerrororvariance,whenanewly labeledexampleismadeavailable,andtrytominimizeitdirectly(Cohnetal,1996;RoyandMccallum,2001). • Expectedmodelchangemaximization.Thisstrategyinvolvesselectingdatapointsthatwouldhavethegreatest impact on the estimate of the current model parameters if they were labeled and added to the training set (Cai et al, 2013). • Disagreement-based query strategies. These approaches focus on selecting data points where there is disagreementamongmultiplemodelsorexperts(Hanneke,2014;Wang,2011;SteveandLiu,2014;Shengetal,2008). One of the most common approaches that use an ensemble of models is query by committee (Seung et al, 1992; Freund et al, 1997; Burbidge et al, 2007), which uses an ensemble of models to identify instances where the models have conflicting predictions. • Diversity- and density-based approaches. These methods exploit the structural information of the instances and try to select data points that are diverse and representative of the overall distribution of the data. One exampleofthisapproachistheuseofMahalanobisdistancetoseekobservationsthatarefarfromthecurrently labeleddatapoints(Ge,2014;Cacciarellietal,2022a).Clusteringmaybeappliedtolabelrepresentativedata points (Nguyen and Smeulders, 2004; Min et al, 2020; Ienco et al, 2013), and graph-based methods can be employed to explore the structure information of labeled and unlabeled data points (Zhang et al, 2020b) or to build upon the semi-supervised label propagation strategy (Long et al, 2008). • Hybrid strategies. Theseareactivelearningalgorithmsthatcombinemultipleinstanceselectioncriteria(Donmez et al, 2007; Huang et al, 2014). For example, by combining margin-based sampling with clustering the learner can select the most uncertain observations within different areas of the input space. By considering these different strategies, one can select the most appropriate approach for a given problem based on the characteristics of the data and the specific requirements of the application. 2.2 Active learning scenarios Activelearningcanbebroadlycategorizedintothreemacroscenarios,basedonhowtheunlabeledinstancesare supplied to the learner and then selected to be labeled by an oracle. Regardless of the particular query strategy being employed, these macro scenarios provide a framework for understanding the flow of information and the decision-makingstepsinvolvedinactivelearning.Thesescenariosserveasahigh-levelcategorizationofdifferent methods for approaching the active learning problem, each with its own set of advantages and disadvantages depending on the specific use case. Understanding these macro scenarios is crucial for selecting the appropriate active learning technique for a particular problem and for comparing different active learning algorithms. In the next subsections, each of the three macro scenarios will be discussed. 2.2.1 Membership query synthesis active learning Thisscenariorepresentsthecasewhenthelearnerisgivencompletefreedomtoaskforthelabelofanydatapoint belongingtotheinputspaceorforasyntheticallygeneratedone.Someexamplesofmembershipquerysynthesis active learning