of a reward or label request) for each selection. There are two main approaches to tackle MAB problems: • Regret minimization. This approach is coherent with the objective of maximizing the cumulative reward observedovermanytrials.Inthiscase,thelearnermustbalanceexploration,namelytryingoutdifferentarms to learn more about the reward distributions, with exploitation, i.e., using current knowledge to choose the mostpromisingarm.Thesekindsofalgorithmsstrikeabalancebetweenlearningagoodmodelandobtaining high rewards. A few examples might be treatment design, online advertising and recommender systems. • Pureexploration.Inthiscase,weareinterestedinfindingthemostpromisingarm,withacertainconfidenceor givenafixedbudgetonthenumberofpulls.Todoso,theobjectiveistolearnagoodmodelwhileminimizing the number of measurements or labels required. This scenario is suggested in circumstances where, due to safetyconstraints,wearenotgivencompletefreedomtochangethevariablelevelsandwearemostlyinterested inunderstandingtheunderlyingmodelgoverningthesystem.Possibleexamplesincludedrugdiscoveryorsoft sensor development (Fortuna et al, 2007; Shi and Xiong, 2018; Chan et al, 2018; Tang et al, 2018). The pure exploration approach is particularly useful when coupled with the study of linear bandits, which are a type of contextual bandit algorithms that assume a linear relationship between the features of the context and the expected reward of each arm. In this type of problem, when an arm x∈X is pulled, the learner observes a reward r(x) that depends on an unknown parameter θ∗ ∈Rd according to the linear model r(x)=x⊤θ∗+ε (45) where ε is a zero-mean i.i.d. noise. This is similar to active linear regression in that, in both cases, the learner aims to select the most informative data points to learn about the underlying model or system (Audibert and Munos, 2010; Jamieson and Nowak, 2014). Soare et al (2014), investigated this problem, in the offline setting, using the G-optimality criterion and a newly proposed XY-allocation algorithm. Jedra and Proutiere (2020) proposed a fixed-confidence algorithm for the same problem, while Azizi et al (2022) analyzed the fixed-budget case, extending the framework to the case where the underlying model is represented by a generalized linear model (Filippi et al, 2010). An interesting variant of this problem is presented in the study of transductive experimental designs. A transductive design is a problem where we can pull arms from a set X ∈ Rd, with the objective of identifying the best arm or improve the predictions over a separate set of observations Z ∈ Rd, which is given, in an unlabeled form, beforehand. A practical example of this case is when we are trying to infer the user preferences over a set of products, but we can only do that by pulling arms from a limited set of free trials. Alternatively, we might be interested in estimating the efficacy of a drug over a certain population, while doing experiments on a population with different characteristics. This problem has been tackled with an active learning approach by Yu et al (2006), with the idea of exploiting unlabeled data points in Z while evaluating the informativeness of the data points in X. The transductive case of sequential experimental design has been exploredbyFiezetal(2019),butinsteadofperformingactivelearning,theywereinterestedininferringthebest reward over Z, only pulling the arms in X. Finally, this has been extended to the online scenario by Camilleri etal(2021),balancingthetrade-offbetweentimecomplexityandlabelcomplexity,namelybetweenthenumber of unlabeled observations spanned and the number of labels queried in order to stop the learning procedure and declare the best-arm. In addition to MAB, reinforcement learning-based approaches can also be applied to active learning in order to optimize a decision-making policy that balances the exploration of uncertain data with the exploitation of information learned from previous observations. This can be particularly useful in applications where the goal is to maximize the expected cumulative reward over time, such as in robotics or game playing. Compared to MAB, reinforcement learning-based approaches offer a more general and flexible framework for active learning, allowing for a wider range of problem formulations and feedback signals (Menard et al, 2021; Fang et al, 2017; Rudovicetal,2019).Oneapproachtocombiningactivelearningandreinforcementlearningisthroughmodeling thesamplingroutineasacontextual-banditproblem,asproposedbyWassermannetal(2019).Inthisapproach, 27 the rewards are based on the usefulness of the query behavior of the learner. The key intuition behind the use of reinforcement learning in online active learning is that the learner gets feedback after the requested label, based on how useful the request actually was. In contrast to the traditional active learning view, where most of the effort is dedicated to the instance selection phase, the learner is penalized ex-post for querying useless instances. The learner gets a positive reward ρ+ if it asks for the label when it would have otherwise predicted the wrong class, and a negative reward ρ− when querying was unnecessary as the model would have predicted therightlabel.Thecontextualbanditproblemisimplementedbybuildinganensembleofdifferentmodels,with each expert suggesting whether to query or not based on whether its prediction certainty exceeds a threshold Γ. The models are assigned a decision power based on how past suggestions were rewarded and how coherent they were with the other experts’ suggestions. When an observation is sent to the oracle for labeling, the reward is computed, and the objective function of the learner is to maximize the total reward over a time horizon T. Another reinforcement learning-based approach has been proposed by Woodward and Finn (2017). They considered the case where at