)−p(y =c |x ) (12) t b t sb t where c and c are the classes with the highest posterior probabilities. This approach is also referred to as b sb best-versus-second-bestmarginand,ashighlightedbyJoshietal(2009),isagoodindicatorofuncertaintywhen a large number of classes are present in the data. It should be noted that the sampling strategy introduced by Qin et al (2021) is not suited for single-pass active learning as it requires computing similarity and uncertainty measures for all the unlabeled observations in the current batch. AnotherapproachtodealwithclassimbalanceinactivelearningwasproposedbyFerdowsietal(2013),who usedlinearSVMsandasamplingstrategythatswitchesbetweenmultipleinstanceselectioncriteriaonline.This approach, however, is limited to a pool-based setting and requires predicting an unsupervised evaluation score for all available unlabeled instances. The impact of the last queried observations on the scores associated with theunlabeleddatapointsisevaluated,andagreedyapproachisusedtodecidewhichinstanceselectioncriterion to trust. SVMs have also been used by Ghassemi et al (2016), who proposed a differentially private approach to online active learning. The privacy concerns are tackled both during the instance selection and the training phase, by randomizing the strategy introduced by Tong and Koller (2002). The informativeness of a data point x is measured by its closeness to the current hyperplane w as in t t c(t)=exp(−d(x ,w ))∈[0,1] (13) t t where the distance function d(x ,w ) is defined as t t |⟨w ,x ⟩| d(x ,w )≜ t t (14) t t ∥w ∥ t In the traditional framework, the label y is queried if we have c(t) > Γ, where Γ is a pre-defined threshold. It t should be noted that c(t)>Γ is equivalent to d(x ,w )≤log1/Γ, which means that the observation x is in a t t t samplingregionofwidth2log1/Γaroundw .However,toavoidadeterministicdecisionprocessonthelabeling t and ensure privacy, some randomness needs to be introduced. This can be done in two ways. First, the labeling decision can be modeled as a Bernoulli random variable of parameter p if c(t)<Γ or (1−p) if c(t)≥Γ, where p<1/2. Another approach is based on the exponential mechanism introduced by McSherry and Talwar (2007). According to this strategy, the algorithm sets a constant probability of labeling data points within a sampling region defined by α, and a decaying probability for points outside of it. The selection strategy is represented by a Bernoulli of parameter (cid:40) e−αϵ/∆ d(x ,w )≤α q(t)= t t (15) e−d(xt,wt)ϵ/∆ d(x t ,w t )>α whereϵ>0and∆=(1−α/M)M.Theauthorsassumedalldatapointsbelongingtothestreamtobebounded innormbyM,∥x ∥≤M for t=1,...,T.Totackletheprivacyconcernswhiletraining,theauthorsproposetwo t mini-batchstrategies,toavoidtheproblemofslowconvergencethatmayresultfromintroducingnoiseaccording to the private stochastic gradient descent scheme (Bassily et al, 2014; Song et al, 2013; Duchi et al, 2013). Two different approaches have been proposed by Ma et al (2016) and Shah and Manwani (2020). Ma et al (2016)proposedaquery-while-learningstrategyfordecisiontreeclassifiers.Theyusedentropyintervalsextracted fromtheevidentiallikelihoodtodeterminethedominantattributes,whichareorderedbasedontheinformation gain ratio. When a new data point x is observed, its label is queried only if there does not exist a dominant t attribute. This will help to identify one and narrow the entropy interval. However, it should be noted that the authors consider a query while learning framework that only partially relates to to online active learning. Shah and Manwani (2020) investigated the online active learning problem for reject option classifiers. Given the high cost that is sometimes associated with a misclassification error, these models are given the option of not predicting anything, for example when dealing with a highly ambiguous instance. A typical application of reject option classifiers is in the medical field, when making a diagnosis with ambiguous symptoms might be particularly difficult. In this case, it could be more beneficial not to provide a prediction but suggest further tests instead. They proposed an approach based on a non-convex double ramp loss function ℓ (Manwani et al, dr 2013), where the label of the current example x is queried only if it falls in the linear region of the loss given t by |f (x )| ∈ [ρ −1,ρ +1], which is the region where the parameter would be updated. Here, ρ refers to the t t t t bandwidth parameter of the reject option classifier that determines the rejection region. 12 FujiiandKashima(2016)investigatedtheproblemofBayesianonlineactivelearning.Theyprovidedageneral framework based on policy-adaptive submodularity to handle data streams in an online setting. The authors distinguishbetweenthestreamsetting,wherethelabelingdecisioncanbemadewithinagiventimeframe,andthe secretary setting, introduced in Section 2, where the labeling decision must be made immediately. The proposed frameworkcanbeappliedinavarietyofactivelearningscenarios,suchasactiveclassification,activeclustering, and active feature selection. The framework is based on the concept of adaptive submodular maximization, whichextendstheideaofsubmodularmaximization.Asetfunctionisconsideredtobesubmodularifitsatisfies the property of diminishing returns, meaning that adding an element to a smaller set has a greater impact on the function value than adding the same element to a larger set. Adaptive submodular maximization allows the modeltoadapttothechangingdistributionofdataovertime,byadjustingthesetfunctiontoreflectthecurrent state of knowledge. This leads to more efficient use of available data and improved performance. So far, we discussed several single model approaches to active learning, which have shown promising results in various applications. However, it is important to note that single models have their limitations and can sometimesstruggletocapturecomplexpatternsanddiverserepresentationspresentinthedata.Toaddressthese limitations, researchers have proposed the use of ensembles or committees as an alternative (Krawczyk et al, 2017).Anensembleorcommitteereferstoagroupofmultiplemodelsthatcollaboratetoproduceamorerobust andaccuratepredictionbycombiningtheirindividualpredictions.Themodelsinanensembleorcommitteecan be trained on