by Zyblewski et al (2020). According to this approach, the learner selects both random and informative data points, where the informativeness is determined using the support function threshold, which in the case of binary classification problems can be interpreted as a distance from the decision boundary. Algorithm 4 Weight adjustment for dynamic classifiers Require: a labeled observation (x ,y ), number of classes K, number of dynamic classifiers D, current weights t t ω with d=1,...,D, DCIR for each class DCIRκ for κ∈K. d if DCIR[y ]< 1 then ▷ Check if it belongs to the minority class t K for d in (1,D) do if C (x )=y then ▷ Check if the prediction made by C is correct d t t d ω ←ω (cid:0) 1+ 1(cid:1) ▷ Increase weight of classifier C d d D d else ω ←ω (cid:0) 1− 1(cid:1) ▷ Decrease weight of classifier C d d D d end if end for end if Another way to perform online active learning in time-varying data streams is to use clustering-based approaches. Halder et al (2023) extended the framework based on stable and dynamic classifiers by introducing a clustering step that aims to train the new stable classifier C on the most informative and representative s instancesfromeachdatablock.Similarly,Iencoetal(2013)investigatedaclustering-basedapproachinabatchbased scenario, where only a fraction of the incoming block of observations can be labeled. They extend the pre-clustering approach (Nguyen and Smeulders, 2004), which had been previously studied in the pool-based scenario, to the stream-based case. The sampling strategy takes into account an extra-cluster metric, to sort the clusters, and an intra-cluster one, to sort the observations within each cluster. When a new batch arrives, observations are clustered, and clusters are sorted based on the homogeneity of the clusters, which is measured taking into account the number of (predicted) classes within each cluster. If a cluster is balanced in the number of expected classes, it is regarded to as an uncertain cluster that covers a more difficult area of the input space. Withineachcluster,thecertaintyofanobservationsisdeterminedbyitsrepresentativeness,namelythedistance from the centroid, and the uncertainty, meant as the maximum a posterior probability among all the predicted classes for x . When the clusters and observations are ranked, the learner starts to iteratively ask the observat tions label in an alternate fashion. To sample the most representative data points from each batch, Zhang et al (2023)suggestedtheuseofdensity-peakclusteringandrecognizetheincompleteclustersinthedynamicfeature spacethroughthealtitudeofthesedatapoints.Thisallowstoquerytheobservationsbelongingtothoseregions in the following iterations. Recently, Yin et al (2023) proposed an adaptive data stream classification method based on microclustering. After initializing micro-clusters from the initial training data, they collected new labels using a mixed strategy that combines random sampling with a class-weighted margin score. Then, the micro-cluster learning model is dynamically updated to adapt to the presence of concept drifts. Another approach that tries to exploit the clustering nature of the incoming observations has been proposed byMohamadetal(2018),withtheuseofbi-criteriaactivelearningalgorithmthatconsidersbothdensityinthe inputspaceandlabeluncertainty.Thedensity-basedcriterionmakesuseofthegrowingGaussianmixturemodel proposed (GGMM) by Bouchachia and Vanaret (2014), which is used to find clusters in the data and estimate its density. This model creates a new cluster when a new data point x has a Mahalanobis distance greater than t a given closeness threshold from the nearest cluster, among the currently available ones. A flowchart describing the main steps of the GGMM is depicted in Figure 10. A Bayesian logistic regression model is used for addressing the label uncertainty criterion and the concept drift. As the classifier parameters w are assumed to evolve over time, the model is incrementally updated using t 21 Observe an Compute the Gaussian No Remove less probability of match contributing unlabeled data point matches? with each Gaussian Gaussian Yes Initialize new Decay the weight of Update parameter of Gaussian with the all Gaussians the Gaussian current data point Fig. 10 MainstepsofthegrowingGaussianmixturemodelusedbyMohamadetal(2018). a discrepancy measure, which is computed as the difference between the uncertainty of the model in x before t and after the true label y is added to the training set. The query strategy follows the b-sampling approach, t in trying to sample, with high probability, the observations that contribute the most to the current error. The combinationofdensityanduncertaintyisalsoemployedbyLiuetal(2021),whoproposedacognitivedualquery strategy for online active learning in the presence of concept drifts and noise. The local density measure is used to obtain representative instances and the uncertainty criterion aim to select data points where the classifier is less confident. The cognitive aspect takes into account Ebbinghaus’s law of human memory (Ebbinghaus, 2013) to determine an optimal replacement policy. The proposed strategy tries to tackle both gradual and abrupt drifts. The drift is generally considered as a change in the underlying joint probability distribution from one time step t to another, namely p (x,y) ̸= p (x,y). The local density of an observation x is defined by the t t+1 t number of times that x is the nearest neighbor of other instances (Ienco et al, 2014). Since we