label y , a new weight t−1 t (cid:98)t t−1 t t vector is estimated using the newly added labeled example (x ,y ) with the regular perceptron update rule t t (Rosenblatt, 1958) as in w =w +M y x (2) t t−1 t t t where M represents the indicator function of the event y ̸=y . If the label is not requested, the model remains t (cid:98)t t unchanged, and we have w = w . At each time step t, the learner decides whether to query the label of a t t−1 data point x by drawing a Bernoulli random variable Z ∈{0,1}, whose parameter is given by t t b P = (3) t b+|p | (cid:98)t where b > 0 is a positive smoothing constant that can be tuned to adjust the labeling rate. In general, as p (cid:98)t approaches 0, the sampling probability P converges to 1, suggesting that the labels are requested for highly t uncertain observations. The sampling scheme introduced by Cesa-Bianchi et al (2004) is referred to as selective sampling perceptron, and it is reported in Algorithm 1. A similar approach to the one proposed by Cesa-Bianchi et al (2004) was investigated by Dasgupta et al (2005),whopresentedoneofthefirstthresholdingtechniquesforonlineactivelearning.Theysuggestedsettinga thresholdonthemargin,withtheideaofsamplingdatapointsx withavalueof|p |lowerthanagiventhreshold t (cid:98)t Γ. The threshold is initially set at a high value and iteratively divided by two until enough misclassifications occur among the queried points. The linear classifier is updated using the reflection concept [60] to give more focus to recent data points. Sculley (2007) built on the works of Cesa-Bianchi and Dasgupta to analyze the online active learning scenarios for real-time spam filtering. The author compares two models, a perceptron and a support vector machine (SVM), and tries three different instance selection criteria, the fixed thresholding approach by Dasgupta et al (2005), the Bernoulli-based approach by Cesa-Bianchi et al (2004), and a newly developed logistic margin sampling. The perceptron is updated as per Dasgupta et al (2005), while the SVM is retrained on all available labeled observations each time a new data point is added. According to the logistic margin sampling strategy, the sampling decision is taken by drawing a Bernoulli random variable Z ∈ {0,1} t with a parameter given by P t =e−γ|p(cid:98)t| (4) As in the traditional b-sampling approach introduced by Cesa-Bianchi et al (2004), this sampling strategy dependsontheuncertainty,meantasthedistancefromthepredictionhyperplane.Themaindifferencebetween the two strategies is the shape of the resulting sampling distribution, which can be observed in Figure 6. 9 Algorithm 1 Selective sampling perceptron Require: a data stream S, an initial model w = (0,...,0)⊤, a time horizon T, a sampling budget B, a 0 parameter b. t←1 ▷ Timestamp c←0 ▷ Labeling cost while c≤B, t≤T do Observe an incoming data point x ∈S and set p =w⊤ x t (cid:98)t t−1 t Predict the label y =SGN(p ) (cid:98)t (cid:98)t Draw a Bernoulli random variable Z of parameter P =b/(b+|p |) t t (cid:98)t if Z =1 then ▷ Sampling decision t Ask for the true label y and update the model t c←c+1 ▷ Pay for the label else Discard x t end if t←t+1 end while Fig. 6 Shapeofthesamplingdistributionsforb-sampling(a)andlogisticsampling(b),fordifferentvaluesofbandγ. The selective sampling perceptron approach has also been investigated by Lu et al (2016), who proposed an online passive-aggressive active learning variant of the algorithm. Similarly to the b-sampling approach, at each timestept,aBernoullirandomvariableZ ∈{0,1}isdrawntodecidewhethertoquerythelabelofthecurrent t data point x or not. In this case, the parameter of Z is given by t t δ P = (5) t δ+|p | (cid:98)t where δ ≥ 1 is a smoothing parameter. Besides not allowing the smoothing parameter to assume a value lower than 1, the sampling distribution is the same as the one governed by the parameter in Equation 3. The main differenceliesinthepassive-aggressiveapproachusedforupdatingtheweightvector.Indeed,whilethetraditional perceptron update, shown in Equation 2, only uses misclassified examples to update the model, the passiveaggressive approach updates the weight vector w ∈ Rd whenever the current loss ℓ (w ;(x ,y )) is nonzero t t−1 t t (Crammer et al, 2006). The new parameter w is found using t w =w +τ y x (6) t t−1 t t t where τ represents the step size, and can be computed according to three different policies t 10  ℓ (w ;(x ,y ))/∥x ∥2 τ t =  m t in (cid:16) t κ − , 1 ℓ t (w t t− t 1 ;(x t ,y t t ))/∥x t ∥2 (cid:17) (7) ℓ t (w t−1 ;(x t ,y t ))/ (cid:16) ∥x t ∥2+1/2κ (cid:17) where κ is a penalty cost parameter. Passive-aggressive algorithms are known for their aggressive approach in updatingthemodel,whichismotivatedbythefactthattraditionalperceptronupdatesmightwastedatapoints that have been correctly classified but with low prediction confidence. Arelatedissuetotheupdateoftheweightvectorw wasemphasizedbyBordesetal(2005),whonotedthat t alwayspickingthemostmisclassifiedexampleisareasonablesamplingstrategyonlywhenthetrainingexamples are highly confident. When dealing with noisy labels, this strategy could lead to