learning strategy to reduce false alarm rate and learn unseen faults. AnotherinterestingindustrialapplicationhasbeenrecentlypresentedbyGhiasietal(2023).Theyproposed adeployableframeworkthatcombinesathermodynamics-basedcompressormodelandaGaussianProcess-based surrogate model with an online active learning module. The objective of the study was to minimize the power absorbed by the machine during the boil off process of centrifugal compressor. In the proposed framework, the simulator,thesurrogatemodel,andtheoptimizerinteractinrealtimetodeterminethenewexperimentalpoints. 5.2 Challenges When applying online active learning strategies to real-world problems, there are several potential issues to consider, including: • Algorithmscalability.Onlineactivelearningalgorithmsneedtobeefficientandscalabletohandlelargedatasets and high-velocity data streams. As the amount of data grows, the computational demands of active learning can become prohibitive, making it difficult to deploy in practice. The time required to make the sampling decision needs to be lower than the feed rate of the process being analyzed. If the algorithm is too slow, it may require a buffer, which reduces the benefits of online active learning. • Labeling quality. Most online active learning strategies rely heavily on the quality of labeled data, which can be challenging to ensure in real-world scenarios. Human annotators may make errors, introduce biases, or interpretlabelinginstructionsdifferently.Forthisreason,inreal-lifesituations,itmaybenecessarytoconsider oracleimperfectionslikeintheknowledgedistillationcase(Baykaletal,2022).Anotherdifficultaspectrelated to labeling quality is the delay or latency, which has been described in Section 2.2.3. 31 • Data drift. In real-world settings, data distributions may shift over time, making it challenging for models to adaptandcontinueprovidingaccuratepredictions.Changesinthedatadistributionmayalsoaffectthequality ofthelabeleddata,asthecriteriaforselectinginformativeinstancesmaybecomelesseffective.Methodsfrom Sections 3.2 and 3.3 should be used when dynamic and ever-changing behaviors are expected. • Model interpretability. Besides simply asking for the most informative instances from a modeling perspective, it might be useful to provide additional information on why a particular instance is beneficial for improving theperformanceofthecurrentmodel.Infieldslikehealthcareandmanufacturingthismighthelppractitioners to improve their understanding of the underlying problem. • Evaluation. When developing active learning methods from a research perspective, the different query strategies are evaluated assuming the ground-truth labels to be available for a held-out test set, or for the data stream being analyzed. However, in real life, the key motivation behind active learning is label scarcity and thus it might be difficult to thoroughly assess the effectiveness of the deployed sampling strategy. • Human-computer interaction. In the context of active learning for data streams, the synergy between human labelersand computer systems plays apivotalrole in thelabeling process.While the majority of onlineactive learningmethodsfocusonqueryingthemostinformativedatapointsinreal-time,wecandistinguishbetween two distinct labeling scenarios: 1. Real-time annotation. In most of the presented works, it is assumed that labels are immediately available when a data point is queried from the stream. This immediate access to true labels enables an optimized active learning routine, as the model can be promptly updated and can recommend exploration of new regions based on up-to-date information. However, this approach poses some implementation challenges that need to be addressed with the use of advanced data annotation tools (Feuz and Cook, 2013). 2. Postponedannotation. Therearecaseswherewemustallowforadelaybetweendataqueryingandlabeling. For instance, methods that consider verification latency (Castellani et al, 2022; Pham et al, 2022) take into account the possibility of delayed labels. This is particularly relevant in situations where a physical quality inspection or medical treatment must occur before the label is revealed. Another example is in the trainingofdeepneuralnetworks,wherereal-timesamplingfromadatastreamisnecessaryduetomemory constraints (Manjah et al, 2023), but the labeling and model update phase may occur when a batch is collected, following a batch-mode active learning strategy (Ren et al, 2022). 6 Summary and future directions This survey outlines the challenge of conducting active learning with data streams and investigates different approaches for selecting the most informative data points in real-time. Table 2 provides a summary of the relevant state-of-the-art approaches, highlighting their main properties and settings. Our examination reveals that existing research has predominantly concentrated on creating online classification models, which can operate with both stationary and drifting data streams. However, there has been comparatively limited effort devoted to online active linear regression or dedicated to constructing online regression models in general. We believe that there are several promising directions for future research in this field. First, we recommend further investigation into online active learning strategies specifically designed for regression models. Given the limited work in this area, there is a need for more advanced methods that can be applied to nonlinear models, beyond linear models or linear bandits. For example, there has been a recent spark of interest toward the use of Bayesianoptimizationforactivelearninginnonlinearregressionproblems(MohamadiandAmindavar,2020;Riis etal,2022).Additionally,model-agnosticmethodsthatcanbeappliedtoavarietyofregressionmodelscouldbe valuableastheywouldprovideamoregeneralsolutiontotheproblem.Second,webelievethatthereispotential for research into single-pass online sampling strategies for dynamic data streams. Ensemble models and batchbased approaches have been the dominant methods in online classification, but some of their assumptions or requirements may not hold in many real-world applications. For instance, in some applications, data may arrive in a continuous stream, and it may not be possible to divide it into batches due to time or memory constraints. In such cases, single-pass online sampling strategies that do not require the use or update of multiple models wouldbemorepractical.Moreover,itcouldbebeneficialtodeveloponlineactivelearningstrategiesthatareable to tackle all the types of distribution shifts introduced in Section 3.2. Finally, the combination of reinforcement learning and active learning in pool-based scenarios is an