close points have a high utility, namely a low classification confidence. While assessing the utility of the incoming data points the authors use real and pseudo-labels by propagating theinformationcontainedinthealreadylabeledobservations,assuggestedbyPhametal(2022).Theideaisto 18 use the spatial information of the queried labels by estimating the still missing labels with a weighted majority vote of the label of its k-nearest neighbors labels, where the weight for each nearest neighbor depends on the arrival time of the labels. The verification latency issue in online active learning with drifting data streams was also extensively analyzed by Pham et al (2022). Consider the general case where at time tx we draw an instance i x , and find it interesting enough to send it to the oracle, which will send back the label y only at time ty, i i i where ty > tx. Before the requested label arrives, we might encounter another instance similar to x and ask i i i again for its label, since the learner could not update its utility function or threshold. Similarly, we might use outdated information when updating the policy in a future window. To tackle these issues, the authors propose a forgetting and simulating strategy to avoid using soon-to-be outdated observations and prevent redundant labeling.TheinstanceselectionisbaseduponthevariableuncertaintystrategyproposedbyZliobaiteetal(2014) and the balanced incremental quantile filter by Kottke et al (2015). If we denote the current sliding window at time tx as W =[tx −∆,tx) and use windows of fixed size ∆, we know that the sliding window that would be n n n n used for training when the label y related to x arrives will be given by D =[ty −∆,ty). The forgetting step n n n n n is then implemented by discarding outdated labeled examples that are included in W but will not be included n in D . If a is a Boolean variable indicating whether the ith observation has been labeled, the set of instances n i selected to be forgotten is given by O =[(x ,y )∀i<n:a =1∧tx,ty ∈W \D ]. (30) n i i i i i n n Similarly, there is a second set of observations, with time stamps D+ = D \W = [tx,ty), where there might n n n n n be instances that have been queried but whose label is not currently available. To avoid losing such information andredundantlyaskingforthelabelofsimilarinstances,thealgorithmsimulatesincominglabelswithabagging approachbyaveragingacrossmultipleutilityestimations.Theyalsoconsideranalternativesimulationapproach based on fuzzy labeling. Similarly to Krawczyk et al (2018), the ADWIN drift detector has also been used by Zhang et al (2020a) whileproposingamethodfordealingwithonlineactivelearninginenvironmentscharacterizedbyconceptdrifts and class imbalance. The instance selection criterion is based on the predictive uncertainty, which they estimate usingthebest-versus-second-bestmarginvalue(Equation12),astheytackleamulti-classclassificationproblem. An initial pool of n observations is passively collected from the stream to initialize the active learning strategy. Then, a threshold Γ is estimated for each class as in i (cid:40) nm n ≥1 Γ i = m niL n n iL <1 (31) niL where i = 1,...,L is the number of classes and m is a pre-defined constant used to control the size of the threshold. The model is represented by an ensemble of N classifiers and, when ADWIN detects a concept drift, the classifier with the higher error is replaced with a newly trained one. Finally, the class imbalance issue is also taken into account in two ways, during the training of the ensemble with the use of class-specific weights, and duringtheactivelearningroutine,bydynamicallyadjustingthethresholdtoselectmoreobservationsbelonging to the minority class. Recently, Cheng et al (2023) presented another approach to combine online active learning with drift detection. Their method involves segmenting the data stream S into fixed-length chunks and then detecting drifts by comparingthedistributionsofadjacentchunks.Afteradriftisdetected,amulti-objectiveoptimizationproblem is formulated in order to identify the most relevant and diverse data points within the current batch. For a data point x , relevance is defined as its contribution to the new concept, and diversity as the Pearson correlation t coefficient with other instances in the same region. Instead, Martins et al (2023) proposed to sample the most uncertaindatapointsfromeachchunk,usingameta-learningframeworktofine-tunethethresholdusedforeach window. This allows to reduce the need for labels while maintaining a steady adaptation to the new concepts. Anotherwindow-basedapproachtoperformactivelearningfromdatastreamshasbeenproposedbyZhuetal (2007). The authors developed an ensemble E by partitioning the data stream S into chunks and then training each of the k models composing the ensemble E on a different chunk of data. In this way, even if the previous observations become unavailable, the models can be used when taking the sampling decision in order to take intoaccountaglobaluncertaintymeasure,whichisamorerobustapproachthantreatingeachchunkasastatic dataset.Attimestept,thelearnerreceivesadatachunkS ,whichisusedtobuildthecurrentclassifierC .Atthis t t point,theensembleiscomposedbyC ,togetherwiththemostrecentk−1classifiers,C ,...,C ,trained t t−k+1 t−1 onthelabeledexamplessampledfromthepreviouslyobserveddatachunks,L ,...,L .Ateachiteration, t−k+1 t−1 the objective is to predict the remaining unlabeled data points from the current chunk, U . The ensemble-based t active learning framework is depicted in Figure 9. The instances selected to be queried are the ones with the 19 largest ensemble variance, and the predictions are obtained by combining the predictions of the single classifiers using