aim to select data points where the classifier is less confident. The cognitive aspect takes into account Ebbinghaus’s law of human memory (Ebbinghaus, 2013) to determine an optimal replacement policy. The proposed strategy tries to tackle both gradual and abrupt drifts. The drift is generally considered as a change in the underlying joint probability distribution from one time step t to another, namely p (x,y) ̸= p (x,y). The local density of an observation x is defined by the t t+1 t number of times that x is the nearest neighbor of other instances (Ienco et al, 2014). Since we are in an online t framework, the authors proposed to measure the local density using a sliding window model, referred to as a cognition window. Based on the concept of memory strength, the model determines when the current window is full and needs to be updated. Finally, the labeling decision is taken by using two thresholds, one for the local density and one for the classifier uncertainty. A different sliding window-based online active learning strategy is the one proposed by Kurlej and Wo´zniak (2011). The authors proposed a sliding window approach based on a nearest neighbors classifier. The reference set for the k-nearest neighbors model is a window, and it is updated in two ways: in a first-in-first-out manner or using the examples selected by the active learning strategy. Since the reference set is updated over time, this method can effectively deal with concept drift and time-varying data streams. The sampling strategy is also based on two criteria. The first one is similar to the margin-based approaches, an instance is queried if it has a low distance from two observations belonging to different classes. The second criterion, similar to the greedy sampling strategy, seeks observations that have a large minimum distance from the observations in the current reference set. Both criteria are implemented by setting a threshold on the distances. A simpler approach for taking into account the time-varying aspect of evolving data stream is to force the model to focus on the most recent observations. Along these lines, Chu et al (2011) propose a framework based on a Bayesian probit model and a time-decay variant. Online Bayesian learning is used to maintain a posterior distribution of the weight vector of a linear classifier over time w , and the time-decay strategies are t employed to tackle the concept drift and give more importance to recent observations. They also propose an online approximation technique that can handle weighted examples, which is based upon Minka (2001). They tested different sampling strategies, built upon an online probit classifier. The instance selection criteria are based on entropy, function-value, and random sampling. 3.3 Evolving fuzzy systems approaches An alternative way to take into account the time-varying nature of evolving data streams is the use of evolving fuzzysystems(EFS)(Lughofer,2011),whicharesoftcomputingtechniquesthatcanefficientlydealwithnovelty and knowledge expansion. EFS are self-developing, self-learning fuzzy rule-based or neuro-fuzzy systems that self-adapt both their parameters and their structure on-the-fly. They try to mimic human-like reasoning by modelingitwithadynamicallydevelopingfuzzyrule-basedstructureandimplementingitutilizingdatastreams using a formal learning process. The basic rule structure of a fuzzy model is given by 22 Rule :if (x is X ) and ... and (x is X ) i 1 i1 n in (35) then (y =a +a x +···+a x ) i i0 i1 1 in n where Rule with i = 1,2,...,R is one of several fuzzy rules in the current rule base; x (j = 1,2,...,n) are i j input variables; y denotes the output of the ith fuzzy rule; X denotes the jth prototype (focal point) of the i ij ith fuzzy rule; a denotes the jth parameter of the ith fuzzy rule. For a more thorough discussion on EFS and ij their use in online learning, please see (Lughofer, 2017, 2011; Ge and Zeng, 2020; Gu et al, 2022). The main components of an EFS are shown in Figure 11. The two key components of an EFS are the structure evolving scheme,whichcontainstherulegenerationandsimplificationmodules,andtheparametersupdatingscheme.The rule generation module defines when a new rule needs to be added to the current model. The rule merging and pruningstepssimplifythemodelsbyremovingredundantrulesandcombiningtworuleswhentheirsimilarityis larger than a given threshold. The parameter updating modules are used to keep track of the model evolution. TheselearningmodulesareusedtoupdatetheEFSeverytimeanewlabeledexample(x ,y )ismadeavailable. t t Parameters Structure evolving updating Rule generation Rule merging Rule pruning Antecedent Consequent Fig. 11 LearningmodulesofanEFS(GeandZeng,2020). The first single-pass active learning approach based on the use of evolving classification models has been proposed by Lughofer (2012). The proposed algorithm is based on two key concepts, conflict and ignorance. The former is related to an incoming data point lying close to the boundary between any two classes; the latter considers the distance of the incoming observation from the currently labeled training set, in the feature space. This suggests that the data point falls within a region that