of data. In this way, even if the previous observations become unavailable, the models can be used when taking the sampling decision in order to take intoaccountaglobaluncertaintymeasure,whichisamorerobustapproachthantreatingeachchunkasastatic dataset.Attimestept,thelearnerreceivesadatachunkS ,whichisusedtobuildthecurrentclassifierC .Atthis t t point,theensembleiscomposedbyC ,togetherwiththemostrecentk−1classifiers,C ,...,C ,trained t t−k+1 t−1 onthelabeledexamplessampledfromthepreviouslyobserveddatachunks,L ,...,L .Ateachiteration, t−k+1 t−1 the objective is to predict the remaining unlabeled data points from the current chunk, U . The ensemble-based t active learning framework is depicted in Figure 9. The instances selected to be queried are the ones with the 19 largest ensemble variance, and the predictions are obtained by combining the predictions of the single classifiers using the weights ω ,...,ω . Finally, a weight updating rule is used to adapt to dynamic data streams. t−k+1 t−1 Predict Ensemble 𝐸 𝜔!"#%$ 𝜔!"# 𝜔! Classifier Classifier … Classifier 𝐶!"#"$ 𝐶!"# 𝐶! … 𝐿!"#"$ 𝑈!"#"$ 𝐿!"# 𝑈!"# 𝐿! 𝑈! Fig. 9 Ensemble-basedactivelearningframeworkfordatastreamsproposedbyZhuetal(2007). Shan et al (2019) and Zhang et al (2018) developed online active learning strategies by building upon the pairwise classifiers strategy introduced by Xu et al (2016). The pairwise strategy makes use of two models, a stable classifier C and a dynamic classifier C , and divides the data stream into batches as in (Zhu et al, 2007). s d The prediction for an incoming data point x is obtained with a weighted average of the predictions obtained t from the two classifiers as in f (x )=ω f (x )+ω f (x ) (32) E t s Cs t d Cd t where ω and ω are the weights associated with the stable and the dynamic classifier, respectively. At time s d t, the stable classifier C is trained on the labeled portions of all the batches processed so far, L ,...,L . s 1 t−1 Conversely, C is trained exclusively on L . The key idea is that whenever the reactive classifier starts to d t−1 outperform the stable classifier, the stable classifier is replaced by the reactive one, which is eventually reset. This replacement allows the learner to adapt to the drift and focus on the most recent instances, forgetting the seeminglyobsoletedatapoints.Themaindrawbackofthisapproachisthatitcannoteffectivelyaddressgradual drifts as the replacement with the classifier trained on the most recent observations makes the learner forget aboutobservationsawayfromthecurrentwindow.Hence,similarlytotheapproachofZhuetal(2007),Shanetal (2019) proposed an extension of this approach, based on an ensemble of classifiers in trying to contemporarily addressgradualdriftsandabruptdrifts.Intheirstrategy,thestableclassifierlearnsfromallthelabeledinstances andthereactiveclassifierisreplacedbyanensembleofdynamicclassifiers,trainedonmultilevelslidingwindows to capture changes in the data stream at different time intervals. The instance selection approach combines random sampling and uncertainty sampling, where the latter is based on the margin value of the predictions obtained by the ensemble. It should be noted that the prediction f for the data point x is obtained as a E t weighted combination of the predictions obtained with the stable and dynamic classifiers as in D (cid:88) f (x )=ω f (x )+ ω f (x ) (33) E t s Cs t d Cd t d=1 The stable classifier has a constant weight ω =0.5 and plays a crucial role in trying to learn the overall trend s and direction of concept drift. Conversely, the dynamic classifiers have gradually decaying weights, according to a damped sliding winding approach where each weight is initialized at 1 and then reduced according to its D creation time (cid:26) ω (cid:0) 1− 1(cid:1) d=1,...,D−1 ω = d D (34) d 1 d=D D The most recent classifiers are useful in detecting sudden concept drifts and have highest weights while the old dynamic classifiers have lower weights and can help to identify gradual drifts. The same pairwise strategy based on an ensemble composed by a stable classifier and D dynamic classifiers was used by Zhang et al (2022). Theymodifiedtheoriginalstrategybyintroducingareinforcementmechanismtoadjusttheweightsω according d to the prediction performance and the class imbalance issue. The weights adjustment strategy is described by 20 Algorithm4.Itshouldbenotedthatthisprocedureisonlyimplementedafterthetruelabely hasbeenrevealed t bytheoracle.Thedampedclassimbalanceratio(DCIR)valueisobtainedbytakingintoaccountthenumberof observations for each class collected so far. This is expected to be useful when dealing with imbalanced classes. With regards to the instance selection criterion, the authors consider a hybrid strategy combining uncertainty samplingandrandomsampling,sinceapproachessolelybasedonuncertaintycouldignoreaconceptchangethat is not close to the boundary. Wo´zniak et al (2023) recently proposed another ensemble-based active learning strategy where the data points to be labeled are selected from the current chunk using the budget labeling active learning strategy introduced by Zyblewski et al (2020). According to this approach, the learner selects both random and informative data points, where the informativeness is determined using the support function threshold, which in the case of binary classification problems can be interpreted as a distance from the decision boundary. Algorithm 4 Weight adjustment for dynamic classifiers Require: a labeled observation (x ,y ), number of classes K, number of dynamic classifiers D, current weights t t ω with d=1,...,D, DCIR for each class DCIRκ for κ∈K. d if DCIR[y ]< 1 then ▷ Check if it belongs to the minority class t K