al (2016). The use of optimality criteria has proven to be highly beneficial in offline experimental design, allowing practitioners to pre-determine the location of each design point with ease. However, these methods require modificationtobeappliedinastream-basedscenariowheredatapointsarrivesequentially.Acommonapproach for obtaining a near-optimal design with streaming observational data is represented by thresholding. Riquelme (2017)proposedathresholdingalgorithmforonlineactivelinearregression,whichisrelatedtotheA-optimality criterion. Their approach uses a norm-thresholding algorithm, where only observations with large, scaled norms are selected. The design is augmented with the observations x whose norm exceeds a threshold Γ given by P(∥x∥≥Γ)=α (42) where α is the ratio of observations we are willing to label out of the incoming data stream. Another approach related to the A-optimality criterion was proposed by Fontaine et al (2021), who studied online optimal design underheteroskedasticityassumptions,withtheobjectiveofoptimallyallocatingthetotallabelingbudgetbetween 25 covariatesinordertobalancethevarianceofeachestimatedcoefficient.Cacciarellietal(2022b)furtherextended thethresholdingapproachintroducedbyRiquelme(2017)byproposingaconditionalD-optimality(CDO)algorithm. The terms conditional refers to the fact the design is marginally optimal, given an initial set of labeled observations to be augmented. The main steps of the CDO approach are reported in Algorithm 5. The authors exploited the connection between D-optimality and prediction variance previously highlighted by Myers et al (2016). The sampling strategy selects observations by setting a threshold Γ given by P (cid:16) x⊤(cid:0) X⊤X (cid:1)−1 x ≥Γ (cid:17) =α (43) t t where X is the current set of labeled observations and x is the data point that is currently under evaluation. t Thethresholdisestimatedusingkerneldensityestimation(KDE)onasetofj unlabeledobservations,whichare taken passively from the data stream without querying any label. This provides an initial set of data, referred to as warm-up set, that can be used to estimate the covariance matrix and the threshold. Algorithm 5 Online active learning using CDO Require: an initial random design X, a data stream S, a warm-up length j, a sampling rate α, a budget B t←1 ▷ Timestamp c←0 ▷ Labeling cost Set W=∅ ▷ Warm-up set to estimate Σ and Γ while t≤j do Observe incoming data point x ∈S t Select x :W=W∪x t t t←t+1 end while Estimate the covariance matrix Σ of W and perform eigendecomposition Σ=UΛU⊤ Whiten the initial design by computing Z=Λ−1/2U⊤X Whiten the warm-up observations by computing V=Λ−1/2U⊤W Estimate Γ using KDE on V with the desired sampling rate α using Equation 43 with Z and V while c≤B and t≤|S| do Observe incoming data point x ∈S t Whiten x by computing z =Λ−1/2U⊤x t t t if z⊤(Z⊤Z)−1z ≥Γ then t t Ask for the label y and augment the labeled dataset: Z←Z∪z i t c←c+1 ▷ Pay for the label Update threshold Γ to measure the prediction variance of the enlarged design else Discard x t end if t←t+1 end while Cacciarellietal(2023)alsoinvestigatedhowthepresenceofoutliersaffecttheperformanceofonlineactivelinear regression strategies. They showed how the design optimality-based sampling strategies might be attracted to outliers, whose inclusion in the design eventually degrades the predictive performance of the model. This issue can be tackled by bounding the search area of the learner with two thresholds, as in P (cid:16) Γ ≤x⊤(cid:0) X⊤X (cid:1)−1 x ≤Γ (cid:17) =α (44) 1 t t 2 wherethechoiceofΓ representsatrade-offbetweenseekingprotectionagainstoutliersandexploringuncertain 2 regions of the input space. The norm-thresholding approach was also extended by Riquelme et al (2017a) to the case where the learner triestoestimateuniformlywellasetofmodels,givenasharedbudget.Thisscenarioissimilartoamulti-armed bandit (MAB) problem where the learner wants to estimate the mean of a finite set of arms by setting a budget onthenumberofallowedpulls(Ruanetal,2020;AudibertandMunos,2010;JamiesonandNowak,2014;Soare et al, 2013). The authors propose a trace upper confidence bound (UCB) algorithm to simultaneously estimate the difficulty of each model and allocate the shared labeling budget proportionally to these estimates. UCB is a common algorithm used in MAB problems to balance exploration and exploitation (Carpentier et al, 2015; 26 Garivier and Moulines, 2008), which takes into account the predicted mean value and the predicted standard deviation, weighted by an adjustable parameter (Thompson et al, 2022). This allows to balance the exploitation of data points with a high predicted value and the exploration of areas with high uncertainty. Ingeneral,MABproblemscanbeseenasaspecialcaseofsequentialexperimentaldesign,wherethegoalisto sequentiallychooseexperimentstoperformwiththeaimofmaximizingsomeoutcome.Thetypicalframeworkof a MAB problem can be regarded as an optimization problem where the learner must identify the option or arm withthehighestreward,amongasetofavailablearmscharacterizedbydifferentrewarddistributions.BothMAB and active learning paradigms involve a sequential decision-making process where the learner aims to maximize a reward or improve model accuracy by selecting an arm to pull or a data point to label, respectively, and receiving feedback (in the form of a reward or label request) for each selection. There are two main approaches to tackle MAB problems: • Regret minimization. This approach is coherent with the objective of maximizing the cumulative reward observedovermanytrials.Inthiscase,thelearnermustbalanceexploration,namelytryingoutdifferentarms to learn more about the reward distributions, with exploitation, i.e., using current knowledge to choose the mostpromisingarm.Thesekindsofalgorithmsstrikeabalancebetweenlearningagoodmodelandobtaining high rewards. A few examples might be treatment design, online advertising and recommender systems. • Pureexploration.Inthiscase,weareinterestedinfindingthemostpromisingarm,withacertainconfidenceor givenafixedbudgetonthenumberofpulls.Todoso,theobjectiveistolearnagoodmodelwhileminimizing the number of measurements or labels required. This scenario is suggested in circumstances where, due to safetyconstraints,wearenotgivencompletefreedomtochangethevariablelevelsandwearemostlyinterested inunderstandingtheunderlyingmodelgoverningthesystem.Possibleexamplesincludedrugdiscoveryorsoft sensor development (Fortuna et al, 2007; Shi and Xiong, 2018; Chan et al, 2018;