identification and proposed a method (presented in Section 3.2) to select the most representative instances on the fly and adapt the model to dynamic data distributions. No Stream of emails Query Receive an email Filter Classify email label? Stream of emails Yes Update filter Fig. 13 Low-costactivespamfiltering(Sculley,2007). Computervisionisanotherinterestingareawhereonlineactivelearningcanbeapplied.Deeplearningmodels require a large amount of annotated data, making manual annotation of thousands of images one of the most challenging aspects of model development. However, it is important to note that the most effective deep active learning methods proposed so far are not easily adaptable to a stream-based setting. Many of these methods involveclusteringormeasuringpairwisesimilarityamongimageembeddings(SenerandSavarese,2017;Agarwal et al, 2020; Ash et al, 2019; Citovsky et al, 2021; Prabhu et al, 2020), which cannot be easily done in a singlepass manner. As a result, most online applications of active learning in computer vision rely on the use of traditional models with uncertainty-based sampling. Narr et al (2016) analyze the stream-based active learning problem for the classification of 3D objects. They used a mondrian forest classifier (Lakshminarayanan et al, 2014), which is an efficient alternative of random forest for the online learning scenario, and selected images with high classification uncertainty to be labeled. Roˇzanec et al (2022) used online active learning to reduce the data labeling effort while performing vision-based process monitoring. Initially, features are extracted from the images using a pre-trained ResNet-18 model (He et al, 2015) and then, using the mutual information criterion √ (Kraskov et al, 2004), only n features (Hua et al, 2005) are retained to fit an online classifier, where n is the total number of observations in the training set. The authors combine a simple active learning strategy based on model uncertainty with five streaming classification algorithms, including Hoeffding tree (Hulten et al, 2001), Hoeffding adaptive tree (Bifet and Gavald`a, 2009), stochastic gradient tree (Gouk et al, 2019), streaming logistic regression, and streaming k-nearest neighbors. Recently, Saran et al (2023) proposed a novel approach to streaming active learning with deep neural networks. Given a neural network with f with parameters θ, lastlayer parameters θ , and the cross-entropy function ℓ, they compute the gradient representation of the data L point x , which is given by t ∂ g(x )= ℓ(f(x ;θ),y ) (46) t ∂θ t (cid:98)t L where y =argmaxf(x ;θ). Then, the data points to be included in the batch for training the model are chosen (cid:98)t t byusingaprobabilityp proportionaltothecontributionofthecurrentexampletothecovariancematrixofthe t examples collected so far, as in (cid:16) (cid:17) p t ∝det Σ(cid:98)t +g(x t )g(x t )⊤ (47) whereΣ(cid:98)t isthecovariancematrixofthedatapointsthathavebeenselectedtobeincludedinthecurrentbatch, up to the time step t. 30 Online active learning has also been explored for object detection tasks. Manjah et al (2023) proposed a stream-based active distillation (SBAD) framework by combining the concepts of active learning and selfsupervision as described in Section 2.3. The SBAD framework enables the deployment of scalable deep-learning models as it does not rely on human annotators and takes into account the imperfection of the oracle when distilling knowledge from a large teacher model to a lightweight student. Indeed, the authors suggest setting a threshold on the confidence of the images and only querying images with high confidence in trying to avoid confirmation bias. The threshold is determined using a warm-up phase, similarly to the approach proposed by Cacciarelli et al (2022b) presented in Algorithm 5. The SBAD pipeline for model development and evaluation is reported in Figure 14. Fig. 14 SBADframework(Manjahetal,2023):sampling,fine-tuningandevaluation.Thesamplingisperformedinasingle-pass mannerviathresholding. The problem of performing active learning for object detection with streaming data has also been explored by Beck et al (2023). In the case of a camera placed on an autonomous vehicle, the collected data encompasses various scenarios, including clear weather, foggy conditions, and rainy weather, all of which require the model to perform effectively. However, the frequency of these scenarios can vary significantly. In situations where one scenario is prevalent, a passive sampling strategy could tend to sample very few examples from the most rare slices. Instead, the proposed streamline approach by attempts to smartly allocate the budget to obtain more observations from the slices where the model is under-performing. The case of autonomous cars was also considered by Yan et al (2023), who used a diversity-based online active learning strategy to reduce false alarm rate and learn unseen faults. AnotherinterestingindustrialapplicationhasbeenrecentlypresentedbyGhiasietal(2023).Theyproposed adeployableframeworkthatcombinesathermodynamics-basedcompressormodelandaGaussianProcess-based surrogate model with an online active learning module. The objective of the study was to minimize the power absorbed by the machine during the boil off process of centrifugal compressor. In the proposed framework, the simulator,thesurrogatemodel,andtheoptimizerinteractinrealtimetodeterminethenewexperimentalpoints. 5.2 Challenges When applying online active learning strategies to real-world problems, there are several potential issues to consider, including: • Algorithmscalability.Onlineactivelearningalgorithmsneedtobeefficientandscalabletohandlelargedatasets and high-velocity data streams. As the amount of data grows, the computational demands of active learning can become prohibitive, making it difficult to deploy in practice. The time required to