SPE statistics with a partial least squares model. Then, when a new observation is added to the training set, they retrain a TS fuzzy model using a sliding window approach. 3.4 Experimental design and bandit approaches Optimal experimental design (Karlin and Studden, 1966) is a research field that is closely related to active learning. It deals with the design of experiments that allow for efficient estimation of model parameters or improved prediction performance while minimizing the number of required labeled examples, also referred to as the number of runs N. Many optimality criteria have been developed in thriving to strike a balance between efficient use of resources and ensuring good performance of the model. The traditional framework of optimal experimental designs focuses on linear regression models of the form y=Xβ+ε (36) where, given d input variables, y is a N×1 vector of response variables, X is a N×d model matrix, β is a d×1 vector of regression coefficients, and ε is a N ×1 vector representing the noise, with covariance matrix σ2I. If the matrix X⊤X is of full rank, an ordinary least square (OLS) estimator for β can be obtained using β(cid:98) = (cid:0) X⊤X (cid:1)−1 X⊤y (37) In general, design optimality criteria leverage the information contained in the moment matrix, which is defined as M = X⊤X/N. The matrix X⊤X plays a crucial role in the estimation of the model coefficients β, and it is important to perceive information about the design geometry. Indeed, with Gaussian noise characterized by ε∼N (cid:0) 0,σ2I (cid:1) , we know that β(cid:98) |X∼N (cid:16) β, (cid:0) X⊤X (cid:1)−1 σ2 (cid:17) (38) and we can define a 100(1−α)% confidence ellipsoid related to the solutions of β using (b−β(cid:98))⊤(cid:0) X⊤X (cid:1) (b−β(cid:98)) ≤F (39) ds2 α,d,N−d where s2 represents the residual mean square, F is the 100(1−α) percentile derived from the Fisher α,d,N−d distribution, and b indicates all the possible vectors that could be the true model parameter β. The ellipsoid can also be expressed as (b−β(cid:98))⊤(cid:0) X⊤X (cid:1) (b−β(cid:98))≤C, where C =ds2F α,d,N−d . The volume of this ellipsoid is inversely proportional to the square root of the determinant of X⊤X, and the length of its axes is proportional to 1/λ , where λ represents the ith eigenvalue of X⊤X, with i = 1,...,d. The so-called alphabetic optimality i i criteria pursuit efficient designs by exploiting these properties (Kiefer, 1959). The most commonly employed optimality criteria for good parameter estimation are A-, D- and E-optimality: 24 • A-optimality. Thiscriterionpursuesgoodmodelparameterestimationbyminimizingthesumofthevariances of the regression coefficients. Knowing that the coefficients variances appear on the diagonal of the matrix (cid:0) X⊤X (cid:1)−1 ,itcanbeshownthatanA-optimaldesignisgivenbyadesignD∗ thatsatisfiesmin tr[M(D)]−1 = D tr[M(D∗)]−1. • D-optimality. This criterion takes into account both the variance and covariance of the regression coefficients, directly minimizing the total volume of the confidence ellipsoid (Myers et al, 2016). A D-optimal design is given by a design D∗ that satisfies max |M(D)|=|M(D∗)| (John and Draper, 1975). D • E-optimality. This strategy tries to shrink the ellipsoid by minimizing the maximum eigenvalue of the covariance matrix. The geometrical intuition behind these criteria is illustrated, in the two-dimensional case, in Figure 12. 𝑏" 𝑏 " 𝑏 " 𝛃" 𝛃" 𝛃" (a) 𝑏 ! (b) 𝑏 ! (c) 𝑏! Fig. 12 Confidenceellipsoidaroundthemodelparametersandoptimalitycriteria:A-optimality(a)shrinksthehyperrectangular enclosingtheconfidenceellipsoid(AspreyandMacchietto,2002;Galvanin,2010),D-optimality(b)aimtoshrinkthetotalvolume oftheellipsoid,andE-optimality(c)triestoreducethelengthofthelongestaxis(Jamieson,2018). Finally, there are also optimality criteria that focus on developing models with good predictive properties. Within this class, G-optimality represents a criterion that is used to seek protection against the worst-case prediction variance in a region of interest R. This is achieved by solving (cid:20) (cid:21) min maxv(x) (40) D x∈R where v(x) represents the scaled prediction variance of the current model in the data point x, which can be computed as v(x)=Nx(m)T(cid:0) X⊤X (cid:1)−1 x(m) (41) where x(m) represents the data point where the variance is being estimated, expanded to the model form. It should be noted that G-optimality can be highly influenced by anomalous observations, as it protects against the highest possible variance over all the region R. This issue can be tackled by using I- or V-optimality, which estimate the overall prediction variance over R by integrating or averaging, respectively. For a more extensive discussion on optimal designs, please see Montgomery (2012) or Myers et al (2016). The use of optimality criteria has proven to be highly beneficial in offline experimental design, allowing practitioners to pre-determine the location of each design point with ease. However, these methods require modificationtobeappliedinastream-basedscenariowheredatapointsarrivesequentially.Acommonapproach for obtaining a near-optimal design with streaming observational data is represented by thresholding. Riquelme (2017)proposedathresholdingalgorithmforonlineactivelinearregression,whichisrelatedtotheA-optimality criterion. Their approach uses a norm-thresholding algorithm, where only observations with large, scaled norms are selected. The design is augmented with the observations x whose norm exceeds a threshold Γ given by P(∥x∥≥Γ)=α (42) where α is the ratio of observations we are willing to label out of the incoming data