TheselearningmodulesareusedtoupdatetheEFSeverytimeanewlabeledexample(x ,y )ismadeavailable. t t Parameters Structure evolving updating Rule generation Rule merging Rule pruning Antecedent Consequent Fig. 11 LearningmodulesofanEFS(GeandZeng,2020). The first single-pass active learning approach based on the use of evolving classification models has been proposed by Lughofer (2012). The proposed algorithm is based on two key concepts, conflict and ignorance. The former is related to an incoming data point lying close to the boundary between any two classes; the latter considers the distance of the incoming observation from the currently labeled training set, in the feature space. This suggests that the data point falls within a region that has not been thoroughly explored by the learner. Later on, Lughofer and Pratama (2018) also proposed the first online active learning approach for evolving regression models. Similarly to their previous work (Lughofer, 2012), the authors consider the ignorance about the input space in the instance selection criterion. Moreover, they also consider the uncertainty in the model outputs and in the model parameters. The predictive uncertainty is assessed in terms of confidence intervals using locally adaptive error bars. The error bars are inspired by (Sˇkrjanc, 2009) and the authors propose a new merging approach for dealing with the case of overlapping fuzzy rules. The uncertainty in the model parameters is instead evaluated using the A-optimality criterion, which will be discussed in Section 3.4 together with other alphabetic optimality criteria. Instead of leveraging the uncertainty about the output, Pratama et al (2015) set adynamicthresholdbasedonthevariableuncertaintystrategyintroducedbyZliobaiteetal(2014)whiletrying to address the what-to-learn question in the training of a recurrent fuzzy classifier. The key idea is that the model is iteratively retrained using data points that fall within rules with low support, which were formed using the smallest amount of observations. Recently, Lughofer and Sˇkrjanc (2023) proposed an online active learning strategy for fuzzy models based on three criteria. • D-optimality in the consequent space to reduce parameter uncertainty, as in Cacciarelli et al (2022b). • Overlap degree in the antecedent space to reduce the number of data points lying in the overlap regions of two different rules. • Novelty content in the antecedent space, indicating the required knowledge expansion through rule evolution. A different kind of threshold, based on the spherical potential theory, has been suggested by Subramanian et al (2014), with the proposal of a meta-cognitive component that evaluates the novelty content of incoming data points. This is done using a knowledge measure represented by the spherical potential, which has been thoroughly investigated in kernel-based approaches (Hoffmann, 2007). The spherical potential is used to set a threshold and decide whether to add a new rule to capture the knowledge in the current sample. It should be 23 notedthattheauthorsalsousedathresholdbasedonthepredictionerror,whichcouldnotbeusedwithscarcity of labels. The prediction error is assessed using the hinge loss error function (Suresh et al, 2008; Zhang, 2004). Fuzzy models have also been used to solve computer vision tasks. Weigl et al (2016) analyze the visual inspection quality control case, which is also considered by Roˇzanec et al (2022). They assess the usefulness of theimagesinasingle-passmanner,buttheinstancesthatareselectedtobequeriedareaccumulatedinabuffer, whichislateronassignedtoanoracleforlabeling.Choosingthesizeofthebufferrepresentsatrade-offproblem between timely updating the classifier and requiring continuous interventions from a human annotator. The active learning strategy works by setting a threshold on the certainty of the model with regards to the incoming data points. The authors take into account two model classes, a random forest classifier and an evolving fuzzy classifier. When using random forest, certainty is computed using the best-versus-second-best margin score. Instead, when using evolving fuzzy classifiers, the sample selection criterion takes into account the conflict and ignorance concepts as in Lughofer (2012). Finally, Cernuda et al (2014) combine the use of fuzzy models with a sampling approach inspired by the multivariate statistical process control literature. Indeed, using a latent structure model, they propose a query strategybasedontheHotellingT2 andthesquaredpredictionerror(SPE)statistics,whichhavebeenextensively used in anomaly detection problems (Cacciarelli and Kulahci, 2022; Gajjar et al, 2018; Vanhatalo and Kulahci, 2016;Vanhataloetal,2017).Ge(2014)usedthesestatisticsforpool-basedactivelearninginconjunctionwitha principalcomponentregressionmodel.ThekeyideaistousetheHotellingT2 andtheSPEstatisticstomeasure the distance between the currently labeled training set and a new unlabeled data point. A high value in one of the two statistics would most likely suggest that the new observation is violating the current model, and thus its inclusion in the training set could bring some valuable information. Similarly, Cernuda et al (2014) use the Hotelling T2 and the SPE statistics with a partial least squares model. Then, when a new observation is added to the training set, they retrain a TS fuzzy model using a sliding window approach. 3.4 Experimental design and bandit approaches Optimal experimental design (Karlin and Studden, 1966) is a research field that is closely related to active learning. It deals with the design of experiments that allow for efficient estimation of model parameters or improved prediction performance while minimizing the number of required labeled examples, also referred to as the number of runs N. Many optimality criteria have been developed in thriving to strike