current 1 2 class c corresponding to k, p(c=k |x ), for each of the two hypotheses. Finally, h (x ) = argmaxp(c|x ) is t i t t calculated for i = 1,2. The label of the current data point is queried in two cases: first, if h (x ) ̸= h (x ), 1 t 2 t meaning the two hypotheses disagree, and second, if h (x ) = K +1∀i, where K is the number of currently i t known classes, meaning the current data point belongs to a new class. The DPMM has also been used by Mohamad et al (2020), who proposed a semi-supervised strategy for performingactivelearninginonlinehumanactivityrecognitionwithsensorydata.Toaccountforthepossibility of dealing with different sensor network layouts, the authors proposed pre-training a conditional restricted Boltzmannmachine(TaylorandHinton,2009;Tayloretal,2006)andusedittoextractgenericfeaturesfromthe sensoryinput.TheinstanceselectionstrategyfollowsaBayesianapproach,intryingtominimizetheuncertainty aboutthemodelparameters.Toassesstheusefulnessoflabelingthedatapointx ,theymeasurethediscrepancy t between the model uncertainty computed from the data observed until the time step t and the expected risk associated with y . This gives a hint of how the current label would impact the current model uncertainty. A t dynamically adaptive threshold Γ is finally used to the determine whether the current expected risk is greater than the current risk. A different kind of committee has been considered by Hao et al (2018a). They proposed a framework for minimizing the number of queries made by an online learner that is trying to make the best possible forecast, given the advice received from a pool of experts. To do so, they adapted the exponentially weighted average forecaster (EWAF) and the greedy forecaster (GF) to the online active learning scenario. A comprehensive analysis of forecasters to perform prediction with expert advice can be found in the book by Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi (2006). In general, at each time step t, the learner or forecaster has access to the predictions for the data point x made by the N experts, f (x ):Rd →[0,1] with i=1,...,N. Based on these predictions, it outputs t i,t t its own prediction p for the outcome y . Then, if the label is revealed, the predictions made by the forecaster t t and the experts are scored using a nonnegative loss function ℓ. The objective of the learner is to minimize the cumulative regret over the time horizon T, which can be seen as the difference between its loss and the one obtained with each expert i as in T (cid:88) R i,T = (ℓ(p t ,y t )−ℓ(f i,t (x t ),y t ))=L(cid:98)T −L i,T (20) t=1 The most simple approach to obtain a prediction p from the learner is to compute a weighted average of the t experts predictions as in (cid:80)N ω f (x ) p = i=1 i,t i,t t (21) t (cid:80)N ω i=1 i,t where ω ≥0 is the weight assigned at time t to the ith expert. With the EWAF, the weight for the ith expert i,t are obtained using eηRi,t−1 ω = (22) i,t (cid:80)N eηRi,t−1 i=1 where η is a positive decay factor and R is the cumulative loss of expert i observed until step t. The i,t−1 exponentialdecayfactorη determinestheweightgiventothepastlosses,withmorerecentlosseshavingahigher 14 weight and older losses having a lower weight. Instead, the GF works by minimizing, at each time step, the largestpossibleincreaseofthepotentialfunctionforallthepossibleoutcomesofy .Thepotentialfunctionisthe t function that assigns a potential value to each expert, which captures the quality of an expert advice based on its past performance. Hao et al (2018a) extended the EWAF and GF by proposing the active EWAF (AEWAF) and active GF (AGF). The key idea is that, while the standard EWAF and GF assume the availability of the true label y after each prediction, in the online active learning framework the loss ℓ can only be measured a t limited number of times. To factor this in, a binary variable Z ∈{0,1} is introduced to decide whether or not t at round t the label is requested. Consequently, the cumulative loss suffered by the ith expert on the instances queried by the active forecaster is given by T (cid:88) L(cid:98)i,T = ℓ(f i,t (x t ),y t )·Z t (23) t=1 The sampling strategy is based on the determination of a confidence condition on the difference between the predictionp ofthefullysupervisedforecasterandthepredictionp madebytheactiveforecaster.Fortheactive t (cid:98)t forecaster we have that p =π (p ), where p depends on the chosen model. The AEWAF is based upon the (cid:98)t [0,1] t t observation that if we have max |f (x )−f (x )|≤δ (24) i,t t j,t t 1≤i,j≤N then |p −p | ≤ δ, where δ is a tolerance threshold. This means that the prediction of the forecaster is close to t (cid:98)t the one obtained in the fully supervised setting if the maximum difference of advice between any two experts is not too large. This assumption might not hold in the presence of noisy or bad experts