have that p =π (p ), where p depends on the chosen model. The AEWAF is based upon the (cid:98)t [0,1] t t observation that if we have max |f (x )−f (x )|≤δ (24) i,t t j,t t 1≤i,j≤N then |p −p | ≤ δ, where δ is a tolerance threshold. This means that the prediction of the forecaster is close to t (cid:98)t the one obtained in the fully supervised setting if the maximum difference of advice between any two experts is not too large. This assumption might not hold in the presence of noisy or bad experts and, to tackle this problem, the authors proposed a robust variant of the AEWAF. The AGF uses instead a confidence condition based on the fact that if max |f (x )−p |≤δ (25) i,t t t 1≤i,j≤N then |p −p | ≤ δ. The general scheme for performing online active learning with expert advice is reported in t (cid:98)t Algorithm 2. Algorithm 2 Online active learning with expert advice Require: a data stream S, a loss function ℓ, a time horizon T, a set of N experts, a tolerance threshold δ, a sampling budget B. t←1 ▷ Timestamp c←0 ▷ Labeling cost while c≤B, t≤T do Observe an incoming data point x ∈S t Receive advide by experts {f (x ):i=1,...,N} i,t t Generate prediction p for the label y and set p =π (p ) t t (cid:98)t [0,1] t Draw a Bernoulli random variable Z of parameter P =b/(b+|p |) t t (cid:98)t if Equation 24 or 25 is satisfied then ▷ Sampling decision Discard x t else Ask for the true label y t c←c+1 ▷ Pay for the label end if t←t+1 end while A similar framework, in conjunction with multiple kernel learning (MKL), has been investigated by Chae and Hong (2021). They propose an active MKL (AMKL) algorithm based on random feature approximation. In general, online MKL based on random feature approximation is a method for online learning and prediction that combines multiple kernel functions to improve the performance of a learning algorithm (Jin et al, 2010; Hoi et al, 2013). In MKL, multiple kernel functions are used to capture different aspects of the data, and the optimal combination of kernels is learned from the data. The online version of MKL based on random feature approximation is designed to handle data that arrives sequentially, and the learning algorithm is updated after 15 each new data point. In kernel-based learning, the target function f(x) is assumed to belong to a reproducing Hilbert kernel space (RKHS). In the proposed AMKL the learner uses an ensemble of N kernel functions. At each time step t, two main steps are implemented. First, each kernel function fˆ (x ), with i = 1,...,n, is i,t t optimized independently of the other kernel functions. This is referred to as local step. Then, in the global step, the learner seeks the best function approximation f(cid:98)t (x t ) by combining the N kernel functions as in N f(cid:98)t (x t )= (cid:88) v (cid:98)i,t fˆ i,t (x t ) (26) where v refers to the weight for the ith kernel function at round t. Similarly to the case with expert advice, (cid:98)i,t the weights are determined by minimizing the regret over the time horizon T, which is defined as the difference between the loss of the learner and the one obtained with the best kernel function f∗ . To do so, the weights are i,t computed based on the past losses ℓ as   ω (cid:98)i,t =exp−η g (cid:88) ℓ (cid:16) fˆ i,τ (x τ ),y τ (cid:17)  (27) τ∈At−1 where η > 0 is a tunable parameter and A is an index of time stamps t indicating the instances for which g t−1 has label has been requested, thus permitting to measure the loss. Then, the weights v are obtained from ω (cid:98)i,t (cid:98)i,t as follows ω v = (cid:98)i,t (28) (cid:98)i,t (cid:80)N ω i=1(cid:98)i,t Finally, the instance selection criterion is based on a confidence condition, denoted by with δ > 0, on the similarity of the learned kernel function, which is a similar to the condition used by Hao et al (2018a) in the formulation of the AEWAF N (cid:88) (cid:16) (cid:17) max v (cid:98)i,t ℓ f(cid:98)i,t (x t ),f(cid:98)j,t (x t ) ≤δ (29) 1≤j≤N i=1 3.2 Drifting data stream classification approaches Activelearningstrategiesbelongingtothiscategoryaimtotackleonlineclassificationtasksintime-varyingdata streams affected by distribution shifts. We can classify distribution shifts into three main categories, depending on whether they concern the feature space x or the output dimension y. A shift that only affects the input distributionp(x),andnottheconditionaldistributionp(y |x),isreferredtoascovariateshift(Zhouetal,2021; Wu et al, 2021; Li et al, 2021) or virtual drift (Baier et al, 2021). In these circumstances, for two different time steps, t and t ,