three different policies t 10  ℓ (w ;(x ,y ))/∥x ∥2 τ t =  m t in (cid:16) t κ − , 1 ℓ t (w t t− t 1 ;(x t ,y t t ))/∥x t ∥2 (cid:17) (7) ℓ t (w t−1 ;(x t ,y t ))/ (cid:16) ∥x t ∥2+1/2κ (cid:17) where κ is a penalty cost parameter. Passive-aggressive algorithms are known for their aggressive approach in updatingthemodel,whichismotivatedbythefactthattraditionalperceptronupdatesmightwastedatapoints that have been correctly classified but with low prediction confidence. Arelatedissuetotheupdateoftheweightvectorw wasemphasizedbyBordesetal(2005),whonotedthat t alwayspickingthemostmisclassifiedexampleisareasonablesamplingstrategyonlywhenthetrainingexamples are highly confident. When dealing with noisy labels, this strategy could lead to the selection of misclassified examples or examples lying on the wrong side of the optimal decision boundary. To address this, they suggested a more conservative approach that selects examples for updating w based on a minimax gradient strategy. t In addition to confidence in the labels of the training examples, confidence in the model itself must be considered when the sampling strategy is based solely on model predictions. Hao et al (2018b) pointed out that a margin-based sampling strategy may be suboptimal when the classifier is not precise, especially in the early rounds of active learning when the model performance may be poor due to limited training feedback, leading to misleading sampling decisions. This issue is also referred to as cold-start active learning (Houlsby et al, 2014; Yuanetal,2020;Jinetal,2022).Toaddressthis,Haoetal(2018b)proposeconsideringsecond-orderinformation in addition to margin value when deciding whether or not to query the label of a data point x . In general, t first-orderonlineactivelearningstrategiesonlyconsiderthemarginvalue,whilesecond-ordermethodsalsotake into account the confidence associated with it. To do this, they assume that the weight vector of the classifier w∈Rd is distributed as w∼N(µ,Σ) (8) wherethevaluesµ andΣ encodethemodelknowledgeandconfidenceintheweightvectorfortheithfeature i i,i w . The covariance between the ith and jth features is captured by the term Σ . The smaller the variance i i,j associated with the coefficient w , the more confident the learner is about its mean value µ . The objective i i of the proposed method is to take into account the confidence of the model when updating the model and making the sampling decision. With regards to the model update, when the true label y of x is queried, the t t Gaussian distribution in Equation 8 is updated by minimizing an objective function based on the KullbackLeibler divergence (Joyce, 2011) to ensure the updated model is not too different from the previous one. The sampling decision uses an additional parameter to the margin p , which is defined as (cid:98)t −η c = (9) t (cid:16) (cid:17) 2 1 + 1 νt γ where η,γ >0 are two fixed hyper-parameters and ν represents the variance of the margin related to the data t point x . The intuition is that, when the variance ν is high, the model has not been sufficiently trained on t t instances similar to x , and querying its label would lead to a model improvement. Then, a soft margin-based t approach is employed by computing ρ =|p |+c (10) t (cid:98)t t If ρ ≤ 0, the label is always queried as the model is extremely uncertain about the margin. Instead, when t ρ >0, the model is more confident, and the labeling decision is taken by drawing a Bernoulli random variable t of parameter δ P = (11) t δ+ρ t where δ >0 is a smoothing parameter. Finally, Hao et al (2018b) also introduced a cost-sensitive variant of the lossfunction,fordealingwithclass-imbalancedapplications.Foracomprehensivediscussiononimbalanceddata stream analysis, please see Aguiar et al (2023). The cold-start issue related to the application of active learning to imbalanced datasets has also been highlighted by Qin et al (2021), who used extreme learning machines (Huang et al, 2006) and extended the active learningframeworkinitiallyproposedbyYuetal(2015)tothemulticlassclassificationscenario.Theyhighlighted the challenge of the lack of instances for certain classes in imbalanced datasets, which can seriously impact the predictive ability of the model for those classes. To address this issue, they propose a sampling strategy that 11 considers both diversity and uncertainty. The diversity is calculated by computing pairwise Manhattan distance between the unlabeled observations. The uncertainty of a data point x is computed by taking the difference t between the largest two posterior probabilities as in margin(x )=p(y =c |x )−p(y =c |x ) (12) t b t sb t where c and c are the classes with the highest posterior probabilities. This approach is also referred to as b sb best-versus-second-bestmarginand,ashighlightedbyJoshietal(2009),isagoodindicatorofuncertaintywhen a large number of classes are present in the data. It should be noted that the sampling strategy introduced by Qin et al (2021) is not suited for single-pass active learning as it requires computing similarity and uncertainty measures for all the unlabeled observations in the current batch. AnotherapproachtodealwithclassimbalanceinactivelearningwasproposedbyFerdowsietal(2013),who usedlinearSVMsandasamplingstrategythatswitchesbetweenmultipleinstanceselectioncriteriaonline.This approach, however, is limited to a pool-based setting and requires predicting an unsupervised evaluation score for all available