unlabeled data Buffer full? point Yes Select top 𝑘 instance(s) Train/update Ask for the Model model Labeled data label(s) Fig. 4 Window-orbatch-basedonlineactivelearning. Another critical property in the design of an effective online active learning strategy is the assumption made about the data stream distribution. One important difference to consider is whether the data stream is stationary or drifting. A stationary data stream is characterized by a stable data generating process where the statisticalpropertiesofthedatadistributionthatremainconstantovertime.Conversely,adriftingdatastreamis markedbychangingstatisticalpropertiesofthedatadistributionovertime,potentiallyduetoalterationsinthe underlying data generating process. The distinction between stationary and drifting data streams is significant because it affects the performance of the active learning strategies. Online active learning strategies that have been developed for stationary data streams may lead to suboptimal performance when applied to drifting data streams.Thisisbecauseconceptdriftcanalterthescaleoftheinformativenessmeasureofunlabeleddatapoints or even urge a complete change of the model, with the acquisition of more observations to accommodate the new concept. Therefore, it is important to accurately assess the nature of the data stream distribution in the design of an active learning strategy. A failure to do so can result in a suboptimal performance and a reduced ability to effectively leverage the strengths of active learning. Another important property to consider when designing an active learning strategy is the label delay or verification latency. This refers to the time needed by the oracle to provide the label when it is requested by the learner. In some cases, there may be a delay L in the oracle providing the label after it has been requested. This property must be taken into account when designing a sampling strategy as there may be redundant label requests for similar instances if this issue is not properly addressed. Label delay can be classified into null latency, intermediate latency, or extreme latency (Souza et al, 2018). The case with null latency, or immediate availability of the label upon request, is commonly used in the stream mining community, but may not be realistic for many practical applications. Extreme latency, where labels are never made available to the learner, is closer to an unsupervised learning task. Intermediate latency assumes a delay 0<L<∞ in the availability of the labels from the oracle. Finally, the training efficiency of the online active learning algorithms should also be taken into consideration. There are two main training approaches in active learning; incremental training and complete re-training. Incremental training involves updating model parameters with a small batch of new data, without starting the training process from scratch (Polikar et al, 2001; Wu et al, 2019; Shilton et al, 2005; Istrate et al, 2018). This approachallowsthemodeltolearnfromnewdatawhilepreservingitsexistingknowledge.Thiscanbeachieved through fine-tuning the model parameters with the new data, or by using techniques such as elastic weight consolidation, which prevent previous knowledge from being erased. Complete re-training, on the other hand, involvestraininganewmodelfromscratchusingtheentirelabeleddatacollectedsofar.Thisapproachdiscards the previous knowledge of the model and starts anew, which may result in the loss of knowledge learned from previous data. Complete re-training is typically used when the amount of new data is substantial, the previous model is no longer relevant, or when the model architecture needs to be altered. It is important to note that the choice of training approach in online active learning algorithms can have a significant impact on the overall performance and effectiveness of the model. 6 2.3 Connection between active learning and semi-supervised learning Semi-supervised learning is a field of research that is closely related to active learning, as both methods are developed to deal with limited labeled data. While active learning aims to minimize the amount of labeled data required to train a model, semi-supervised learning is a technique that trains a model using a combination of labeled and unlabeled data. Active learning can be considered a special case of semi-supervised learning, as it allows the model to actively select which data points it wants to be labeled, rather than relying on a fixed set of labeleddata.Inthecontextofonlinelearning,Kulkarnietal(2016)conductedastudythatprovidedanoverview ofsemi-supervisedlearningtechniquesforclassifyingdatastreams.Thesetechniquesdonotaddresstheprimary question of active learning, which is when to query, but they are useful in exploiting the information contained in the unlabeled data points and in addressing issues related to model update and retraining in limited labeled data environments. It is also worth noting that semi-supervised learning can be used in combination with active learning to improve the data selection strategy. By leveraging the strengths of both methods, it is possible to achieve better performance and more efficient learning compared to using either method alone. Semi-supervised learning approaches can be distinguished into three categories, unsupervised preprocessing, wrapper methods, and graph-based methods. Unsupervised preprocessing refers to the use of unsupervised learning techniques, such as dimensionality reduction (Cacciarelli and Kulahci, 2023), clustering, or feature extraction, to preprocess the entire dataset, labeled and unlabeled, before it is fed to the supervised model (Frumosu and Kulahci, 2018). The goal is to transform the data into a more useful representation that can be learned more easily by a supervised