of querying redundant labels. Toenhancepool-basedactivelearning,manyapproachescombineuncertainty-basedinstanceselectioncriteria with acquisition functions such as entropy (Shannon, 1948; Wu et al, 2022), mutual information (Haussmann 4 et al, 2020), or variation ratio (Schmidt et al, 2020). Entropy is commonly used as an acquisition function in active learning because it provides a way to measure the uncertainty of the model predictions for a given data point. The entropy of a probability distribution is a measure of the amount of disorder or randomness in the distribution. In the context of active learning, the entropy of a model’s predicted class probabilities for a data point can be used as a measure of the model’s uncertainty about the correct class label for that data point. Acquiring examples with the highest uncertainty is one way to select data points for annotation, but it is not the only way. Mutual information and variation ratio can also be used on the predictions obtained with the currentmodel,inorder toseekadiverse setofdatapointsforwhichthepredictionsarethemostuncertain.For a more comprehensive discussion on pool-based active learning, readers are referred to the surveys (Aggarwal et al, 2014; Settles, 2009; Fu et al, 2013; Kumar and Gupta, 2020). 2.2.3 Online active learning In this type of active learning, we cannot greedily select the most informative observations from a static pool, as the instances are generated in a continuous stream and cannot be stored in their entirety before a decision is made. This is similar to the famous statistical puzzle known as the secretary problem (Freeman, 1983), where a hiring manager must make a hiring decision for each applicant as they are interviewed, without the benefit of seeingallapplicantsfirst.Ingeneral,onlineactivelearningisacrucialscenarioforvariousreal-worldapplications where the ability to make a sampling decision in real-time is of utmost importance. A few examples are: • Chemical or manufacturing processes. In these applications, a learner is tasked with predicting the quality of the final product but may only have a short timeframe to make the sampling decision, to avoid traceability issues,particularlyinhigh-volumeproduction(Schmittetal,2013;Lieberetal,2012).Also,taskslikepredictive maintenance and visual inspection might benefit from a real-time selection of new examples to be labeled and included in the training set (Roˇzanec et al, 2022). • Video streaming and clinical trials. In these cases, a decision must be made on the fly, as users arrive or volunteers appear sequentially, and there may not be enough time to accumulate a pool of potential users or patients (Fowler et al, 2023; Riquelme, 2017). • Text classification: In NLP, online active learning can be used for tasks such as sentiment analysis and spam detection, where the learner continuously learns from new incoming data points which need to be labeled to update the model in real-time and improve accuracy (Kranjc et al, 2015). • Fraud detection. To effectively detect fraudulent activities, the learner must continuously select new examples to label so that it can continuously update its decision-making process (Carcillo et al, 2018, 2017). • Online customer service. Online customer service agents can use online active learning to improve their performancebycontinuouslylearningfromcustomerinteractions.Todothis,thelearnermustcontinuouslyselect new examples to label or customer information to obtain, so that it can predict the best response based on past interactions and improve its accuracy over time (Zheng and Padmanabhan, 2006). • Marketing.Onlineactivelearningcouldalsobeappliedinthefieldofmarketingtoselectinformativeexamples inreal-timeandcontinuouslyoptimizecustomertargetingandpersonalization(CarneinandTrautmann,2019; Jamil and Khan, 2016). Observe an Data Is it No Discard the unlabeled data stream useful? observation point Yes Train/update Model model Labeled data Ask for the label Fig. 3 Single-passonlineactivelearning. One of the defining features of online active learning strategies is their data processing capabilities. Figure 3 and Figure 4 provide a visual representation of the two main approaches; single-pass and window-based. Singlepassalgorithmsobserveandevaluateeachincomingdatapointonthefly,whereaswindow-basedalgorithms,also referred to as batch-based methods, observe a fixed-size chunk of data at a time. In this approach, the learner evaluates the entire batch of data and selects the top k observations as the most informative ones to be labeled. 5 This approach is referred to as best-out-of-window sampling. The specific value of k and the dimensionality of the buffer can vary based on the storage capabilities of the system and the computational time required to update the model. Window-based methods are useful in situations where data is generated in large quantities andthealgorithmdoesnothaveatightconstraintonthetimeavailablefordecision-making.Incontrast,singlepass methods are necessary when the algorithm needs to make a decision immediately after observing a specific data point. No Observe an Data Is it stream unlabeled data Buffer full? point Yes Select top 𝑘 instance(s) Train/update Ask for the Model model Labeled data label(s) Fig. 4 Window-orbatch-basedonlineactivelearning. Another critical property in the design of an effective online active learning strategy is the assumption made about the data stream distribution. One important difference to consider is whether the data stream is stationary or drifting. A stationary data stream is characterized by a stable data generating process where the statisticalpropertiesofthedatadistributionthatremainconstantovertime.Conversely,adriftingdatastreamis markedbychangingstatisticalpropertiesofthedatadistributionovertime,potentiallyduetoalterationsinthe underlying data generating process. The distinction between stationary and drifting data streams is significant because it affects the performance of the active learning strategies. Online active