HSDD2, and GShenFSU2.1 EOSs, respecthat the time normalization partially mitigates the abtively. These regions represent the decision boundaries sence of time dilation effects in GREP, leading to imformedbytheSVMmodel. Anypointwithinthisregion proved classification accuracy. However, even the bestwill be classified according to the EOS associated with performing model, SVM, reaches only 68.0±4.3% accuthat region. Most GREP points fall within the decision racy. boundaries of their respective EOSs. In contrast, all GR pointsarelocatedwithintheregionscorrespondingtothe Strictly speaking, since f encapsulates some EOSpeak HSDD2 EOS for the GREP data, meaning all GR signals dependent information [50], time normalization by f peak willbeclassifiedasHSDD2. However,thetime-normalized isexpectedtoweakenthedistinctionsbetweenGWscorGR data points, shown in the right panel, align better responding to different EOSs. To assess the impact of with the decision boundaries. Thus improves classifica- thiseffect,weconducttestsonmodelstrainedandtested tion accuracy to ∼ 60%. Despite this, the accuracy re- using either GR or GREP data (cf. Section A4 for details). Ouranalysisshowsthattheresultingdropinaccuracyduetothiseffectis∼6%,whichisinsufficienttoaccountforthelowEOSclassificationaccuracyobservedin 1 Forourtimeseriesdata,a10kHzsamplingratecorrespondsto GREP-trained models. This suggests that GREP wavea0.1msstepsize,resultingin81datapointsovertherange[–2, forms lack the precision required to capture subtle EOS6]ms. related features. 9 IV. CONCLUSION tionally,ourconclusionthattheGREPapproximationis too inaccurate for EOS classification remains unaffected by the noise. Beyond EOS classification, our ultimate In this study, we evaluated the impact of varigoal is to extract nuclear matter parameters through reous machine learning models, parameter configurations, gression analysis using a parameterized family of EOSs. and data preprocessing techniques on the accuracy of Finally, we have not incorporated traditional frequentist equation-of-state(EOS)classificationusingbouncegravor Bayesian statistical methods in this study. We will itationalwave(GW)datafromrotatingcore-collapsesuaddress these issues in more detail in future work. pernovae. As expected, we find that the signal length has a significant impact on accuracy: longer signals provide more information, enhancingthemodel’sabilitytoclassifyac- ACKNOWLEDGMENTS curately (cf. Section A1 for details). Applying a Tukey window has little impact on classification accuracy, as The authors would like to thank the anonymous refermost EOS-sensitive information is concentrated in the ees for their insightful comments and suggestions, which middlepartofthesignal, whilethewindowprimarilyaf- improved the quality of this manuscript. This research fectsthesignal’stails(cf. SectionA2). Wefindthatthe is supported by the Science Committee of the Ministry sampling frequency does not influence accuracy as long of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of as it exceeds 6 kHz or above, which is unsurprising since Kazakhstan (Grant No. AP19677351 and AP13067834) the GW signal lacks substantial components at these or and by the Nazarbayev University Faculty Development higher frequencies (cf. Section A3 for details). Competitive Research Grant Program, with Grant No. Our results show that Support Vector Machines 11022021FD2912 and 201223FD8821. (SVM), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) achieve the highest classification accuracy, exceeding 97% for a set of four DATA AVAILABILITY EOSs. Random Forest (RF), XGBoost (XGB), Logistic Regression (LR), and k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) also The gravitational waveforms are publicly accessible at perform well, with average accuracies of 96.8%, 96.6%, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13774509. 95.8%, and 93.8%, respectively. In contrast, the Na¨ıve Bayes method demonstrates the lowest accuracy, falling below 50% (cf. Section IIIA for details). Appendix A: Dependence on data pre-processing We also assess the impact of approximating the gravitational wave (GW) signal using the general relativisInthissection,weexaminehowclassificationaccuracy ticeffectpotential(GREP)onclassificationperformance. is influenced by the signal’s time range, the choice of Models trained on GREP data classify waveforms based window function, the sampling rate, and the time noron general relativity (GR) with an average accuracy of malization. approximately35%,whichissignificantlylowerthanthe over 90% accuracy achieved by models trained on GR signals. Thisoutcomeisexpected,asGREPcanapproximate GR gravity but does not capture other relativis- 1. Time range tic effects, such as time dilation, leading to a generally higher frequency in GREP. However, when the GW sig- We first study the influence of the signal length and nalisnormalizedbythepeakGWfrequency,theclassifi- duration on the accuracy of the classifier using a sliding cation accuracy improves substantially, but still remains window approach. We consider signal lengths from 2 to below 70% (cf. Section IIIB for details). This suggests 8 ms, with each length increasing in 1 ms increments. thattheGREPapproximationproduceswaveformslack- For each signal length, a sliding window moves across ing the precision necessary to capture subtle signal char- the entire signal in 1 ms steps. This is shown in Fig. 6, acteristics, such as the EOS. where each horizontal line represents a signal length and Our work has a number of limitations. In particular, locationinunitsofms. Theverticalpositionofeachline we consider only one progenitor model. While differ- corresponds to the classification accuracy value. ent progenitors are expected to produce similar bounce As we can see, accuracy varies with both signal length GWsignalsforthesameangularmomentumdistribution and location. For shorter signals, up to 5 ms, accuracy [44,61],variationsofafewpercentcanstilloccur. More- is more sensitive to the position of the window. This is over,wedonotincludedetectornoise. Thesefactorsmay becauseshorterwindowsdonotcapturethewholeregion affect the ability of ML models to identify the EOS. The that contains all key information. For example, for the presenceofdetectornoisereducesclassificationaccuracy. signalfrom-2to0ms,theclassificationaccuracyisbelow However,sincetheprimaryaimofthisworkistocompare 55%, while for region from 0 to 2 ms, it raises to about the relative performance of ML models, this comparison 93