ProceedingsofMachineLearningResearch259:1–15,2024 MachineLearningforHealth(ML4H)2024 U-Fair: Uncertainty-based Multimodal Multitask Learning for Fairer Depression Detection Jiaee Cheong∗ jc2208@cam.ac.uk University of Cambridge & the Alan Turing Institute, United Kingdom. Aditya Bangar adityavb21@iitk.ac.in Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India. Sinan Kalkan skalkan@metu.edu.tr Dept. of Comp. Engineering and ROMER Center for Robotics and AI, Middle East Technical University (METU), Turkiye. Hatice Gunes hg410@cam.ac.uk University of Cambridge, United Kingdom. Abstract 1. Introduction Machine learning bias in mental health is Mental health disorders (MHDs) are becoming inbecoming an increasingly pertinent challenge. creasingly prevalent world-wide (Wang et al., 2007) DespitepromisingeffortsindicatingthatmultiMachine learning (ML) methods have been successtaskapproachesoftenworkbetterthanunitask approaches, there is minimal work investigat- fully applied to many real-world and health-related ing the impact of multitask learning on per- areas (Sendak et al., 2020). The natural extenformance and fairness in depression detection sion of using ML for MHD analysis and detection norleveragedittoachievefairerpredictionout- has proven to be promising (Long et al., 2022; He comes. Inthiswork,weundertakeasystematic et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2020). On the other hand, investigation of using a multitask approach to ML bias is becoming an increasing source of conimprove performance and fairness for deprescern (Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018; Barocas et al., sion detection. We propose a novel gender2017; Xu et al., 2020; Cheong et al., 2021, 2022, based task-reweighting method using uncer2023a). Given the high stakes involved in MHD tainty grounded in how the PHQ-8 questionanalysis and prediction, it is crucial to investigate naire is structured. Our results indicate that, and mitigate the ML biases present. A substantial although a multitask approach improves performance and fairness compared to a unitask amount of literature has indicated that adopting a approach, the results are not always consis- multitask learning (MTL) approach towards deprestent and we see evidence of negative transfer sion detection demonstrated significant improvement andareductionintheParetofrontier,whichis across classification-based performances (Li et al., concerning given the high-stake healthcare set- 2022; Zhang et al., 2020). Most of the existing work ting. Our proposed approach of gender-based rely on the standardised and commonly used eightreweighting with uncertainty improves perforitem Patient Health Questionnaire depression scale mance and fairness and alleviates both chal- (PHQ-8)(Kroenkeetal.,2009)toobtainthegroundlengestoacertainextent. Ourfindingsoneach truth labels on whether a subject is considered dePHQ-8subitemtaskdifficulty arealsoinagreepressed. A crucial observation is that in order to ment with the largest study conducted on the arrive at the final classification (depressed vs nonPHQ-8 subitem discrimination capacity, thus providing the very first tangible evidence link- depressed), a clinician has to first obtain the scores ingMLfindingswithlarge-scaleempiricalpop- of each of the PHQ-8 sub-criterion and then sum ulation studies conducted on the PHQ-8. them up to arrive at the final binary classification (depressed vs non-depressed). Details on how the fi- ∗ ThisworkwasundertakenwhileJiaeeCheongwasavisit- nal score is derived from the PHQ-8 questionnaire ingPhDstudentatMETU. can be found in Section 3.1. ©2024J.Cheong,A.Bangar,S.Kalkan&H.Gunes. 5202 naJ 61 ]GL.sc[ 1v78690.1052:viXra U-Fair: Uncertainty-based Multimodal Multitask Learning for Fairer Depression Detection Task Losses Task 1 ℒ 1 8 1 Visual CONV- … e lu Task 2 ℒ 2 ℒ𝐹=෍ 𝑡=1 𝜎𝑡 𝐹 2 ℒ𝑡+log𝜎𝑡 𝐹 U-Fair Modality 2D BiLSTM FC d o M Task 3 ℒ 3 Loss M A o u d d a i l o it y CO 1 N D V- BiLSTM FC … n o isu Task 4 ℒ 4 ⊕ ℒ U−Fair Mo T d ex a t li ty CO 1 N D V- BiLSTM FC e C x a o t n r n d a c c t a t e t e e x d t n u v a … a i t s l i u o fe n a a l , o t a u f u r t e h d s e io F la n o itn e ttA T T T T a a a a s s s s k k k k 5 6 7 8 ℒ ℒ ℒ ℒ 5 7 6 8 ℒ𝑀= ෍ 𝑡= 8 1 𝜎𝑡 1 𝑀2 ℒ𝑡+log𝜎𝑡 𝑀 =ℒ 𝐹 + ℒ 𝑀 Figure 1: Our proposed method is rooted in the observation that each gender may have different PHQ-8 distributionsanddifferentlevelsoftaskdifficultyacrossthet tot tasks. Weproposeaccounting 1 8 for this gender difference in PHQ-8 distributions via U-Fair. Moreover, eachgendermaydisplaydifferentPHQ- approachtowardsbuildingrelevantMLforhealthcare 8 task distribution which may results in different solutions, we propose a novel method, U-Fair, which PHQ-8 distribution and variance. Although inves- accounts for the gender difference in PHQ-8 distritigation on the relationship between the PHQ-8 and bution and leverages on uncertainty as a MTL task gender has been explored in other fields such as psy- reweighing mechanism to achieve better gender fairchiatry (Thibodeau and Asmundson, 2014; Vetter ness for depression detection. Our key contributions et al.,2013; Leunget al.,2020), this has notbeenin- are as follow: vestigatednoraccountedforinanyoftheexistingML • We conduct the first analysis to investigate how fordepressiondetectionmethods. Moreover,existing MTLimpactsfairnessindepression detection by workhasdemonstratedtheriskofafairness-accuracy using each PHQ-8 subcriterion as a task. We trade-off