propose a novel method, U-Fair, which PHQ-8 distribution and variance. Although inves- accounts for the gender difference in PHQ-8 distritigation on the relationship between the PHQ-8 and bution and leverages on uncertainty as a MTL task gender has been explored in other fields such as psy- reweighing mechanism to achieve better gender fairchiatry (Thibodeau and Asmundson, 2014; Vetter ness for depression detection. Our key contributions et al.,2013; Leunget al.,2020), this has notbeenin- are as follow: vestigatednoraccountedforinanyoftheexistingML • We conduct the first analysis to investigate how fordepressiondetectionmethods. Moreover,existing MTLimpactsfairnessindepression detection by workhasdemonstratedtheriskofafairness-accuracy using each PHQ-8 subcriterion as a task. We trade-off (Pleiss et al., 2017) and how mainstream show that a simplistic baseline MTL approach MTL objectives might not correlate well with fair- runs the risk of incurring negative transfer and ness goals (Wang et al., 2021b). No work has inves- may not improve on the Pareto frontier. A tigated how a MTL approach impacts performance Pareto frontier can be understood as the set of across fairness for the task of depression detection. optimal solutions that strike a balance among Inaddition, priorworkshavedemonstratedthein- different objectives such that there is no better tricaterelationshipbetweenMLbiasanduncertainty solution beyond the frontier. (Mehta et al., 2023; Tahir et al., 2023; Kaiser et al., • We propose a simple yet effective approach 2022; Kuzucu et al., 2024). Uncertainty broadly that leverages gender-based aleatoric uncerrefers to confidence in predictions. Within ML re- tainty which improves the fairness-accuracy search, two types of uncertainty are commonly stud- trade-offandalleviatesthenegativetransferpheied: data (or aleatoric) and model (or epistemic) un- nomena and improves on the Pareto-frontier becertainties. Aleatoric uncertainty refers to the inher- yond a unitask method. entrandomnessintheexperimentaloutcomewhereas • We provide the very first results connecting the epistemic uncertainty can be attributed to a lack of empirical results obtained via ML experiments knowledge(Gal,2016). Aparticularlyrelevanttheme with the empirical findings obtained via the is that ML bias can be attributed to uncertainty in largest study conducted on the PHQ-8. Intersome models or datasets (Kuzucu et al., 2024) and estingly, our results highlight the intrinsic relathat taking into account uncertainty as a bias mittionship between task difficulty as quantified by igation strategy has proven effective (Tahir et al., aleatoric uncertainty and the discrimination ca2023; Kaiser et al., 2022). A growing body of litpacity of each item of the PHQ-8 subcriterion. eraturehasalsohighlightedtheimportanceoftaking uncertaintyintoaccountwithinarangeoftasks(Naik et al., 2024; Han et al., 2024; Baltaci et al., 2023; 2. Literature Review Cetinkayaetal.,2024)andhealthcaresettings(Grote and Keeling, 2022; Chua et al., 2023). Motivated by Gender difference in depression manifestation has the above and the importance of a clinician-centred longbeenstudiedandrecognisedwithinfieldssuchas 2 U-Fair: Uncertainty-based Multimodal Multitask Learning for Fairer Depression Detection Approach Evaluation Study Problem Multimodal Uncertainty NFMMeasures PF NT ND Zannaetal.(2022) Anxiety ✕ ✓ 2 ✕ ✕ 1 Lietal.(2023a) Healthcareprediction ✕ ✕ 2 ✕ ✕ 1 Lietal.(2023b) Organtransplant ✕ ✕ 2 ✕ ✕ 1 BanandJi(2024) Resourceallocation ✕ ✕ 2 ✓ ✕ 3 Lietal.(2024) Riskfactorprediction ✕ ✕ 2 ✕ ✕ 1 U-Fair(Ours) Depressiondetection ✓(AVT) ✓ 4 ✓ ✕ 2 Table 1: Comparative Summary with existing MTL Fairness studies. Abbreviations (sorted): A: Audio. NFM: Number of Fairness Measures. NT: Negative Transfers. ND: Number of Datasets. PF: Pareto Frontier. T: Text. V: Visual. medicine (Barsky et al., 2001) and psychology (Hall In concurrence, although MTL has proven to be et al., 2022). Anecdotal evidence has also often sup- effective at improving fairness for other tasks such ported this view. Literature indicates that females as healthcare predictive modelling (Li et al., 2023a), and males tend to show different behavioural symp- organ transplantation (Li et al., 2023b) and resource toms when depressed (Barsky et al., 2001; Ogrod- allocation(BanandJi,2024),thisapproachhasbeen niczukandOliffe,2011). Forinstance, certainacous- underexplored for the task of depression detection. ticfeatures(e.g. MFCC)areonlystatisticallysignifiComparative Summary: Our work differs from cantlydifferentbetweendepressedandhealthymales the above in the following ways (see Table 1). First, (Wang et al., 2019). On the other hand, compared our work is the first to leverage an MTL approach to tomales, depressedfemalesaremoreemotionallyeximprove gender fairness in depression detection. Secpressiveandwillingtorevealdistressviabehavioural ond, we utilise an MTL approach where each task cues (Barsky et al., 2001; Jansz et al., 2000). correspondstoeachofthePHQ-8subtasks(Kroenke Recent works have indicated that ML bias is et al., 2009) in order to exploit gender-specific differpresent within mental health analysis (Zanna et al., ences in PHQ-8 distribution to achieve greater fair2022; Bailey and Plumbley, 2021; Cheong et al., ness. Third, we propose a novel gender-based uncer2024a,b; Cameron et al., 2024; Spitale et al., 2024). tainty MTL loss reweighing to achieve fairer perforZanna et al. (2022) proposed an uncertainty-based mance across gender for approach to address the bias present in the TILES dataset. Bailey and Plumbley (2021) demonstrated 3. Methodology: U-Fair the effectiveness of using an existing bias mitigation method, data re-distribution, to mitigate the gender In this section, we introduce U-Fair, which uses biaspresentintheDAIC-WOZdataset. Cheongetal. aleatoric-uncertainties for demographic groups to (2023b,2024a)demonstratedthatbiasexistsinexist- reweight their losses. ing mental health algorithms and