Universally Sloppy Parameter Sensitivities in Systems Biology Models Ryan N. Gutenkunst,1,∗ Joshua J. Waterfall,2 Fergal P. Casey,3 Kevin S. Brown,4 Christopher R. Myers,5 and James P. Sethna1
1Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
2Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
3UCD Conway Institute of Biomolecular & Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Belfield, Ireland
4Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
5Cornell Theory Center, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
(Dated: October 25, 2018) Quantitative computational models play an increasingly important role in modern biology. Such models typically involve many free parameters, and assigning their values is often a substantial obstacletomodeldevelopment. Directlymeasuringin vivo biochemicalparametersisdifficult,and collectivelyfittingthemtootherexperimentaldataoftenyieldslargeparameteruncertainties. Nevertheless, in earlier work we showed in a growth-factor-signaling model that collective fitting could yield well-constrained predictions, even when it left individual parameters very poorly constrained. Wealsoshowedthatthemodelhada‘sloppy’spectrumofparametersensitivities,witheigenvalues roughlyevenlydistributedovermanydecades. Hereweuseacollectionofmodelsfromtheliterature to test whether such sloppy spectra are common in systems biology. Strikingly, we find that every model we examine has a sloppy spectrum of sensitivities. We also test several consequences of this sloppiness for building predictive models. In particular, sloppiness suggests that collective fits to even large amounts of ideal time-series data will often leave many parameters poorly constrained. Testsoverourmodelcollectionareconsistentwiththissuggestion. Thisdifficultywithcollectivefits may seem to argue for direct parameter measurements, but sloppiness also implies that such measurements must be formidably precise and complete to usefully constrain many model predictions. We confirm this implication in our growth-factor-signaling model. Our results suggest that sloppy sensitivity spectra are universal in systems biology models. The prevalence of sloppiness highlights the power of collective fits and suggests that modelers should focus on predictions rather than on parameters. Non-technical Summary: Dynamic systems biol- ues may be a very inefficient route to useful models. ogy models typically involve many kinetic parameters, the quantitative determination of which has been a se- Dynamic computational models are powerful tools for rious obstacle to using these models. Previous work developingandtestinghypothesesaboutcomplexbiologshowed for a particular model that useful predictions icalsystems[1,2,3]. Ithasevenbeensuggestedthatsuch could be extracted from a fit long before the experimen- modelswillsoonreplacedatabasesastheprimarymeans tal data constrained the parameters, even to within or- for exchanging biological knowledge [4]. A major chalders of magnitude. This was attributed to a ‘sloppy’ lenge with such models, however, is that they often pospattern in the model’s parameter sensitivities; the sensi- sess tens or even hundreds of free parameters whose valtivity eigenvalues were roughly evenly spaced over many ues can significantly affect model behavior [5, 6]. While decades. Consequently, themodelbehaviordependedef- high-throughputmethodsfordiscoveringinteractionsare fectively on only a few ‘stiff’ parameter combinations. well-developed[7],high-throughputmethodsformeasurHerewestudytheconverseproblem,showingthatdirect ing biochemical parameters remain limited [8]. Furtherparametermeasurementsareveryinefficientatconstrain- more, using values measured in vitro in an in vivo aping the model’s behavior. To yield effective predictions plication may introduce substantial inaccuracies [9, 10]. such measurements must be very precise and complete; Ontheotherhand,collectivelyfittingparameters[11,12] even a single imprecise parameter often destroys predic- by optimizing the agreement between the model and tivity. We also show here that the characteristic sloppy available data often yields large parameter uncertaineigenvalue pattern is reproduced in sixteen other diverse ties [13, 14, 15]. In approaches typically more focused models from the systems biology literature. The appar- on steady-state distributions of fluxes in metabolic netent universality of sloppiness suggests that predictions works,metaboliccontrolanalysishasbeenusedtoquanfrom most models will be very fragile to single uncer- tify the sensitivity of model behavior with respect to patain parameters and that collective parameters fits can rameter variation [16], and flux-balance analysis and reoften yield tight predictions with loose parameters. To- latedtechniqueshaveprobedtherobustnessofmetabolic gethertheseresultsarguethatfocusingonparameterval- networks [17, 18]. One way to cope with the dearth of reliable parameter values is to focus on predictions that are manifestly parameter-independent [19], but these are mostly quali-
∗Electronicaddress: rng7@cornell.edu tative. An alternative is not to forsake quantitative pre7002 luJ
72
]MQ.oib-q[
3v9301070/oib-q:viXra
2 dictions, but to accompany them with well-founded un- sure in vivo than the values of individual parameters. certainty estimates based on an ensemble of parameter Much work has focused on optimizing experimental desets statistically drawn from all sets consistent with the sign to best constrain model parameters with collective availabledata[20]. (Uncertaintiesinthemodelstructure fits[24,25,26]. Weargueagainstthisfocusonparameter itself may be important in some cases. Here we focus on values, particularly when our understanding of a system parameter uncertainties, as they are often important on is tentative and incomplete. Concrete predictions can be their own.) extracted from models long before their parameters are Brown et al. took this approach in developing a even roughly known [21], and when a system is not alcomputational model of the well-studied growth-factor- readywell-understood,itcanbemoreprofitabletodesign signaling network in PC12 cells [21]. They collectively experimentstodirectlyimprovepredictionsofinteresting fit their model’s 48 parameters to 68 data points from systembehavior[27]ratherthantoimproveestimatesof
14 cell-biology experiments (mostly Western blots). Af- parameters. terthefit,all48parametershadlargeuncertainties;their
95%confidenceintervalseachspannedmorethanafactor of 50. Surprisingly, while fitting this modest amount of I. RESULTS datadidnottightlyconstrainanysingleparametervalue, itdidenableusefullytightquantitativepredictionsofbeA. Systems Biology Models have Sloppy havior under interventions, some of which were verified Sensitivity Spectra experimentally. In calculating their uncertainties, Brown et al. found Our collection of 17 systems biology models [2, 21, 25, that the quantitative behavior of their model was much
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41] more sensitive to changes in certain combinations of pawas drawn primarily from the BioModels database [42], rameters than others. Moreover, the sensitivity eigenan online repository of models encoded in the Systems values were approximately equally spaced in their logaBiology Markup Language (SBML) [43]. The collected rithm, a pattern deemed ‘sloppy’. Such sloppy sensitivimodels encompass a diverse range of biological systems, ties were subsequently seen in other multi-parameter fitincluding circadian rhythm, metabolism, and signaling. ting problems, from interatomic potentials [22] to sums Allthemodelsareformulatedassystemsofordinarydifof exponentials [23]. The fact that sloppiness arises in ferential equations, and they range from having about suchdisparatecontextssuggeststhatitmaybeaunivertentomorethantwohundredparameters. Inmostcases, sal property of nonlinear multi-parameter models. (Here theseparameterswerenotsystematicallyfitormeasured the term ‘universal’ has a technical meaning from statisin the original publication. ticalphysics,denotingasharedcommonpropertywitha Wequantifiedthechangeinmodelbehaviorasparamedeepunderlyingcause;see[23]. Universalityinthissense tersθvariedfromtheirpublishedvaluesθ∗bytheaverage doesnotimplythatallmodelsmustnecessarilysharethe squared change in molecular species time courses: property.) tee I n n s t y h s i t s em w s or b k i , ol w og e y b m eg o i d n el b s y fro em m p t i h ri e ca li l t l e y ra t t e u s r t e in , g ex s a e m ve i n n - - χ2(θ)≡ 1 (cid:88) 1 (cid:90) Tc (cid:20) y s,c (θ,t)−y s,c (θ∗,t) (cid:21)2 dt,
2N N T σ ingthesensitivityoftheirbehaviortoparameterchanges. c s s,c c 0 s Strikingly,wefindthatBrownetal’smodelisnotunique (1) in its sloppiness; every model we examine exhibits a a kind of continuous least-squares fit of parameters θ sloppy parameter sensitivity spectrum. (Thus, in the to ‘data’ simulated from published parameters θ∗. Here models we’ve examined sloppiness is also universal in y (θ,t) is the time course of molecular species s given s,c the common English sense of ubiquity.) We then study parametersθ inconditionc, andT isthe‘measurement’ c the implications of sloppiness for constraining parame- time for that condition. We took the species normalters and predictions. We argue that obtaining precise ization σ to be equal to the maximum value of species s parameter values from collective fits will remain difficult s across the conditions considered; other consistent noreven with extensive time-series data, because the behav- malizations yield the same qualitative conclusions. ior of a sloppy model is very insensitive to many param- For each model, the sum in Equation 1 runs over all eter combinations. We also argue that, to usefully con- molecular species in the model and (except where infeastrainmodelpredictions,directparametermeasurements sible) over all experimental conditions considered in the must be both very precise and complete, because sloppy corresponding paper—an attempt to neutrally measure modelsarealsoconverselyverysensitivetosomeparam- system behavior under conditions deemed significant by eter combinations. Tests over our collection of models theoriginalauthors. (Thetotalnumberofconditionsand support the first prediction, and detailed analysis of the species are denoted by N and N , respectively.) SBML c s model of Brown et al. supports the second contention. filesandSloppyCell[44]scriptsforallmodelsandcondiSloppiness, while not unique to biology, is particu- tions are available in Dataset S1. larly relevant to biology, because the collective behav- To analyze each model’s sensitivity to parameter variior of most biological systems is much easier to mea- ation, we considered the Hessian matrix corresponding
3 FIG. 1: Parameter sensitivity spectra Subfigure A illustrates the quantities we calculate from Hχ2
, while subfigures B and C show that all the models we examined have sloppy sensitivity spectra. A: Analyzing Hχ2 corresponds to approximating the surfaces of constant model behavior change (constant χ2) as ellipsoids. Thewidthofeachprincipalaxisisproportionaltooneoverthesquarerootofthecorrespondingeigenvalue. Theinnerellipsoid’s projection onto and intersection with the logθ axis are denoted P and I , respectively.
1 1 1 B:PlottedaretheeigenvaluespectraofHχ2 forourcollectionofsystemsbiologymodels. Themanydecadesgenerallyspanned indicate the ellipses have very large aspect ratio. (The spectra have each been normalized by their largest eigenvalue. Not all values are visible for all models.) C: Plotted is the spectrum of I/P for each parameter in each model in our collection. Generally very few parameters have I/P ≈1, suggesting that the ellipses are skewed from the bare parameter axes. (Not all values are visible for all models.) The models are ordered by increasing number of free parameters and are: (a) eukaryotic cell cycle [28], (b) Xenopus egg cell cycle[29],(c)eukaryoticmitosis[30],(d)genericcircadianrhythm[31],(e)nicotinicacetylcholineintra-receptordynamics[32],
(f) generic kinase cascade [33], (g) Xenopus Wnt signaling [34], (h) Drosophila circadian rhythm [35], (i) rat growth-factor signaling[21],(j)Drosophilasegmentpolarity[36],(k)Drosophilacircadianrhythm[37],(l)Arabidopsiscircadianrhythm[2],
(m)in silico regulatorynetwork[25],(n)humanpurinemetabolism[38],(o)E.colicarbonmetabolism[39],(p)buddingyeast cell cycle [40], (q) rat growth-factor signaling [41]. to χ2: schematicallyillustratestheseellipsoidsandsomeoftheir characteristics. (Details of calculating Hχ2 and related Hχ2
≡ d2χ2(θ)
. (2) quantities are found in Methods. Dataset S1 includes j,k dlogθ j dlogθ k Hχ2 for each model.) We took derivatives with respect to logθ to consider rel- Theprincipalaxesoftheellipsoidsaretheeigenvectors ative changes in parameter values, because biochemical ofHχ2,andthewidthoftheellipsoidsalongeachprinciparameters can have different units and widely varying palaxisisproportionaltooneoverthesquarerootofthe scales. AnalyzingHχ2 correspondstoapproximatingthe corresponding eigenvalue. The narrowest axes are called surfaces of constant model behavior deviation (as quan- ‘stiff’, and the broadest axes ‘sloppy’ [20]. The eigentified by χ2) to be N -dimensional ellipsoids, where N value spectra for the models in our collection are shown p p is the number of parameters in the model. Figure 1A in Figure 1B (each normalized by its largest eigenvalue).
4 In every case, the eigenvalues span many decades. All but one span more than 106, indicating that the sloppiest axes of the ellipsoids illustrated in Figure 1A are generally more than one thousand times as long as the stiffest axes. In each spectrum the eigenvalues are also approximately evenly spaced in their logarithm; there is nowell-definedcutoffbetween‘important’and‘unimportant’ parameter combinations. The Hessian matrix is a local quadratic approximation to the generally nonlinear χ2 function. Principal componentanalysisofextensiveMonteCarlorunsinthe Brown et al. model, however, indicates that the sloppiness revealed by Hχ2 is indicative of full nonlinear χ2 function [20]. Along with their relative widths, the degree to which theprincipalaxesoftheellipsoidsarealignedtothebare parameter axes is also important. We estimated this by comparing the ellipsoids’ intersections I with and proi jections P onto each bare parameter axis i. If I /P =1 i i i then one of the principal axes of the ellipsoids lies along bareparameterdirectioni. Figure1CplotstheI/P spectrum for each model. In general, very few axes have I/P ≈ 1; the ellipses are skewed from single parameter FIG. 2: Sloppiness and uncertainties directions. As in Figure 1A, the contours represent surfaces of constant modelbehaviordeviation. ThecloudsofpointsrepresentpaNaively, one might expect the stiff eigenvectors to emrameter set ensembles. body the most important parameters and the sloppy diA:Collectivefittingofmodelparametersnaturallyconstrains rections to embody parameter correlations that might the parameter set ensemble along stiff directions and allows suggest removable degrees of freedom, simplifying the it to expand along sloppy directions. The resulting ensemble model. Empirically, we have found that the eigenvectors may be very large, yet encompass little variation in model oftentendtoinvolvesignificantcomponentsofmanydif- behavior,yieldingsmallpredictionuncertaintiesdespitelarge ferent parameters; plots of the five stiffest eigenvectors parameter uncertainties. (Σ denotes the 95% confidence for
1 for each model are in Supporting Text S1. This is un- the value of θ .)
1 derstandable theoretically; the nearly-degenerate sloppy B: If all parameters are directly measured to the same precieigenvectorsshouldmix,andthestiffeigenvectorscanin- sion, the parameter set ensemble is spherical. The measureclude arbitrary admixtures of unimportant directions to mentprecisionrequiredforwell-constrainedpredictionsisset by the stiffest direction. a given important parameter combination. (Indeed, in C:Ifoneparameter(hereθ )isknownlesspreciselythanthe analogous random-matrix theories the eigenvectors are 2 rest, the cloud is ellipsoidal. If not aligned with a sloppy diknown to be uncorrelated random vectors [45].) While rection,thecloudwilladmitmanymodelbehaviorsandyield the relatively random eigenvectors studied here may not large prediction uncertainties. (Note that the aspect ratio of be useful in guiding model reduction, more direct explo- the real contours can be greater than 1000.) rationsofparametercorrelationshaveyieldedinteresting correlated parameter clusters [46]. Thesecharacteristicparametersensitivitiesthatevenly span many decades and are skewed from bare parameter data that the model can fit perfectly. In a collective fit, axesdefinea‘sloppy’model[20]. Figures1Band1Cshow the parameter set ensemble samples from all sets of pathat every model we have examined has a sloppy sensi- rametersforwhichthemodelbehaviorisconsistentwith tivity spectrum. Next we discuss some broad questions the data. Because sloppy models are very insensitive to about the relation between model predictions, collective parameter combinations that lie along sloppy directions, fits,andparametermeasurementsandseehowthesloppy the parameter set ensemble can extend very far in those properties of these models may suggest answers. directions, as illustrated schematically in Figure 2A. As aresult, individualparameterscanbeverypoorlydetermined (e.g., confidence interval indicated by Σ in Fig1 B. Consequences of Sloppiness ure 2A). Below we discuss a test of this prediction over all the models in our collection. The difficulty of extracting precise parameter values Unless one has direct interest in the kinetic constants from collective fits in systems biology modeling is well- for the underlying reactions, uncertainties in model preknown [26]. Sloppiness offersan explanationfor thisand dictionsaregenerallymoreimportantthanuncertainties predicts that it will be true even for fitting to complete in model parameters. The parameter set ensemble illus-
5 trated in Figure 2A yields large uncertainties on individual parameters, but can yield small uncertainties on predictions. Whilethefittingprocessallowstheensemble to expand along sloppy directions, the fit naturally constrains the ensemble along stiff directions, so that model behavior varies little within the ensemble, and predictions can be consequently tight. Direct parameter measurements, on the other hand, will have uncertainties that are uncorrelated with the model’sunderlyingstiffandsloppydirections. Forexample, if all parameter measurements are of the same precision, the parameter set ensemble is spherical, as illustrated in Figure 2B. For tight predictions, this ensemble must not cross many contours, so the required precision issetbythestiffestdirectionofthemodel. Consequently, high precision parameter measurements are required to yield tight predictions. Moreover, these measurements must be complete. If one parameter is known less precisely, the parameter set ensemble expands along that parameteraxis,asillustratedinFigure2C.Ifthataxisis FIG. 3: Fitting parameters to idealized data not aligned with a sloppy direction, model behavior will Shown are histograms of the relative confidence interval size
Σ for each parameter in each model of our collection, after varydramaticallyacrosstheparametersetensembleand fitting 100 times as many time-series data points (each with predictionswillhavecorrespondinglylargeuncertainties.
10%uncertainty)asparameters. Inmostcasesalargenumber Below we discuss tests of both these notions, exploring ofparametersareleftwithgreaterthan100%uncertainty. (A the effects of direct parameter measurement uncertainty parameter constrained with 95% probability to lie between 1 on predictions of a particular model. and 100 would have Σ≈100.) Labels are as in Figure 1.
1. Parameter Values from Collective Fits The fact that nonlinear multiparameter models often Does the sloppiness of these models really prevent one allow a wide range of correlated parameters to fit data from extracting parameters from collective fits? Here we haslongbeenappreciated. Asoneexample,a1987paper discuss a test of this prediction using an idealized fitting by Brodersen et al. on ligand binding to hemoglobin and procedure. albumin empirically found many sets of parameters that Ourχ2measureofmodelbehaviorchange(Equation1) acceptablyfitexperimentaldata,withindividualparamcorresponds to the cost function for fitting model paeter values spanning huge ranges [13]. Our sloppy model rameters to continuous time-series data that the model perspective ([20, 21, 23], Figure 1) shows that there is a fits perfectly at parameters θ∗; Hχ2 is the corresponding deep underlying universal pattern in such least-squares Fisher information matrix (Equation 2). We used this fitting. Indeed, an analysis of the acceptable binding paidealized situation to test the prediction that collective rametersetsfromthe1987studyshowsthesamecharacfits will often poorly constrain individual parameters in teristic sloppy eigenvalue spectrum we observed in Figour collection of sloppy models. ure 1B (Supporting Text S5). Wedefinedtherelative95%confidenceintervalsizeΣ i as the ratio between parameter i at the upper and lower extremes of the interval, minus one. (A parameter value
2. Predictions from Direct Parameter Measurements constrainedafterthefittoliebetween10and1000would haveΣ≈100,whileoneconstrainedbetween1.0and1.5 would have Σ = 0.5.) We assumed 100 times as many Figures2Band2Csuggeststhatdirectparametermeadata points (each with 10% uncertainty) as the number surementsmustbebothpreciseandcompletetousefully of parameters in each model. Figure 3 shows histograms constrain predictions in sloppy systems. Here we discuss of the quadratic approximation to Σ for each parame- a test of this notion in a specific model. ter in each model after fitting such data. (See Meth- We worked with the 48-parameter growth-factorods.) For most of the models, the figure indicates that signaling model of Brown et al., shown schematically in such fitting leaves many parameters with greater than Figure4A[21]. Theparametersinthismodelwereorigi100%uncertainty(Σ>1). Indeed,evenfittingthislarge nally collectively fit to 14 time-series cell-biology experiamount of ideal data can leave many parameter values ments. Wefocusedonthismodelbecauseitisinstructive very poorly determined, as expected from the sloppiness tocompareourresultsconcerningdirectparametermeaof these models and our discussion of Figure 2A. surements with prior results from collective fitting. For
6 ouranalysis,weassumedthathypotheticaldirectparameter measurements would be centered about the original best-fit values. One important test of the model was a prediction of the time-course of ERK activity upon EGF stimulation, giveninhibitionofthePI3Kbranchofthepathway. The yellow shaded region in Figure 4B shows the uncertainty bound on this prediction from the original collective fit, calculated by exhaustive Monte Carlo [21]. The tightnessofthispredictionisremarkableconsideringthehuge uncertainties the collective fit left in the individual parametervalues(yellowcirclesinFigure4C).Notasingle parameter was constrained to better than a factor of 50. How precise would direct parameter measurements have to be to yield as tight a prediction as the collectivefit? Forthisprediction,thePI3Kbranch(inhibited) andC3Gbranch(NGF-dependent)ofthepathwayareirrelevantinthemodel; theremainingreactionsinvolve24 parameters. To achieve the red prediction in Figure 4B, all 24 involved parameters must be measured to within a factor of plus or minus 25% (Figure 4C, red squares). Withcurrenttechniques, measuringevenasinglein vivo biochemicalparametertosuchprecisionwouldbeachallenging experiment. Such high precision is required because,asillustratedinFigure2B,themeasurementsneed to constrain the stiffest combination of model parameters. What if a single parameter is left unmeasured? For example, consider high precision measurements of 23 of the 24 involved parameters, all but the rate constant for the activation of Mek by Raf1. For this unmeasured parameter, we assumed that an informed estimate could bound it at 95% confidence to within a total range of
1000 (e.g., between 1s−1 and 1000s−1). The resulting prediction(blueinFigure4B)hasverylargeuncertainty and would likely be useless. Note that these hypothetical measurements constrain every individual parameter value more tightly than the original collective fit (blue triangles versus yellow circles in Figure 4C), yet the preFIG. 4: Parameter and prediction uncertainties diction is much less well-constrained. Neither this paA: Our example prediction is for ERK activity upon EGF rameter nor this prediction is unique. Uncertainty for stimulationgivenPI3Kinhibitioninthis48-parametermodel thispredictionislargeifanyoneofabout18ofthe24inof growth-factor-signaling in PC12 cells [21]. volved parameters is unmeasured (Supporting Text S2). B:Shadedregionsare95%confidenceintervalscalculatedvia Furthermore,otherpossiblepredictionsinthismodelare exhaustiveMonteCarloforourexamplepredictiongivenvarsimilarly fragile to single unmeasured parameters (Supious scenarios for constraining parameter values. porting Text S3). C:PlottedistherelativesizeΣofthe95%confidenceinterval for each parameter. To usefully constrain Brown et al.’s model, direct paThe scenarios represented are: (red, squares) all model pa- rameter measurements would need to be both precise rametersindividuallymeasuredtohighprecision,(blue,trian- and complete. By contrast, collective parameter fitting gles)allparameterspreciselymeasured,exceptoneestimated yielded tight predictions with only a modest number tolowprecision,(yellow,circles)allparameterscollectivelyfit of experiments. These results are expected given the to 14 real cell-biology experiments. Precisely measured indi- model’s sloppiness. vidual parameter values enable a tight prediction (B: middle redband),butevenonepoorlyknownparametercandestroy predictivepower(B:wideblueband). Incontrast,thecollecII. DISCUSSION tivefityieldsatightprediction(B:tightestyellowband)but only very loose parameter constraints (C: circles). The large parameteruncertaintiesfromthecollectivefit(C:circles)cal- ByexaminingseventeenmodelsfromthesystemsbiolculatedherebyMonteCarloarequalitativelysimilartothose ogyliterature[2, 21,25,28,29,30, 31,32,33,34,35, 36, seen in the linearized fit to idealized data (Figure 3, model
(i)). (For clarity, the dashed red lines trace the boundary of the red confidence interval.)
7
37,38,39,40,41],weshowedthattheirparametersensi- fromtheliterature(possiblyfromin vitro measurements tivities all share striking common features deemed ‘slop- or different cell lines) [33, 38], set classes of constants to piness’; the sensitivity eigenvalues span many decades the same value (e.g., phosphorylation rates) [31, 32, 41], roughly evenly (Figure 1B), and tend not to be aligned and adjust key parameters to qualitatively best fit the with single parameters (Figure 1C). We argued that existing data [2, 37, 40]. In retrospect, these approaches sloppy parameter sensitivities help explain the difficulty may be successful because the models are sloppy—they of extracting precise parameter estimates from collective can be tuned to reality by adjusting one key paramefits, even from comprehensive data. Additionally, we ter per stiff direction, independently of how reliably the argued that direct parameter measurements should be other parameters are estimated. inefficient at constraining predictions from sloppy mod- Computational modeling is a potentially invaluable els. We then showed that collective parameter fits to tool for extrapolating from current experiments and discomplete time-series data do indeed yield large parame- tinguishing between models. But we cannot trust the ter uncertainties in our model collection (Figure 3). Fi- predictions of these models without testing how much nally,weconfirmedforthe48-parametersignalingmodel they depend on uncertainties in these estimated paramof Brown et al. [21] that direct parameter measurements eters. Conversely, if we insist upon a careful uncertainty mustbeformidablypreciseandcompletetousefullycon- analysis, it would seem unnecessary to insist upon tight strain model predictions (Figure 4). prior estimates of the parameters, since they do not sigWhat causes sloppiness? (1) Fundamentally, slop- nificantly enhance model predictivity. Because the bepiness involves an extraordinarily singular coordinate havior of a sloppy model is dominated by a few stiff ditransformation in parameter space between the bare pa- rections that nonetheless involve almost all the paramrameters natural in biology (e.g., binding affinities and eters, direct parameter measurements constrain predicrate constants) and the eigenparameters controlling sys- tions much less efficiently than comparably difficult extem behavior, as discussed in [23]. Both experimental periments probing collective system behavior. interventions and biological evolution work in the bare Oursuggestionofmakingpredictionsfrommodelswith parameter space, so this parameterization is fundamen- verypoorlyknownparametersmayappeardangerous. A taltothesystem,notanartifactofthemodelingprocess. model with tens or hundreds of unmeasured parameters
(2)Sloppinessdependsnotjustuponthemodel,butalso might seem completely untrustworthy; we certainly beon the data it is fit to; exhaustive experiments designed lieve that any prediction derived solely from a best-fit to decouple the system and separately measure each pa- set of parameters is of little value. Uncertainty bounds rameter will naturally not yield sloppy parameter sensi- derived from rigorous sensitivity analysis, however, distivities. (3) In biological systems fit to time-series data, tinguishthosepredictionsthatcanbetrustedfromthose Brown and Sethna [20] note that sloppiness may arise that cannot. Of course, successful fits and predictions due to under-determined systems, proximity to bifurca- may arise from models that are incorrect in significant tions,andseparationoftimeorconcentrationscales,but ways; forexample,onemodelpathwaywithadjustedpatheydoubtthatthesecanexplainallthesloppinessfound rameters may account for two parallel pathways in the in their model. Our analysis includes complete data on real system. A model that is wrong in some details all species, and hence is overdetermined. Small eigenval- may nevertheless be useful in guiding and interpreting ues near bifurcations are associated with dynamic vari- experiments. For computational modeling to be useful ables, and not the system parameters we investigate. To in incompletely understood systems, we must focus not study the effect of time and concentration scales we cal- on building the final, perfect, model with all parameters culated Hχ2 for a version of the Brown et al. model in precisely determined, but on building incomplete, tenwhichallconcentrationsandrateconstantswerescaledto tative and falsifiable models in the most expressive and one[47]. Theresultingmodelremainssloppy,witheigen- predictive fashion feasible. valuesroughlyuniformlyspanningfivedecades(Support- Giventhatdirectparametersmeasurementsdonoteffiing Text S4). (4) Motivated by simple example systems, cientlyconstrainmodelbehavior,howdowesuggestthat we have argued elsewhere that sloppiness emerges from experimentalists decide what experiment to do next? If a redundancy between the effects of different parameter the goal is to test the assumptions underlying a model, combinations[23]. Wearepresentlyinvestigatingdecom- oneshouldlookforpredictionswithtightuncertaintyespositions of parameter space into sloppy subsystems [46] timates that can be readily tested experimentally. If the andtheuseofphysicallyorbiologicallymotivatednonlin- goalistoreduceuncertaintyincrucialmodelpredictions, ear coordinate changes to remove sloppiness or motivate onemustinvokethestatisticalmethodsofoptimalexpersimpler models. These potential methods for model re- imentaldesign,whichwehavestudiedelsewhere[27]and finement,however,demandacompleteandsophisticated whichmaybeconvenientlyimplementedinmodelingenunderstandingofthesystemthatisunavailableformany vironments that incorporate sensitivity analysis (such as biological systems of current interest. SloppyCell [44]). Parameter estimation has been a serious obstacle in In our approach, the model and its parameters cansystemsbiologymodeling. Withtensofunknownparam- not be treated in isolation from the data that informed eters, a typical modeling effort might draw some values model development and parameter fitting. This compli-
8 cates the task of exchanging knowledge in the modeling parameter sets consistent with the stated parameter uncommunity. To support our approach, standards such certainties. (For each parameter θ , the logarithm of its i as SBML [43] that facilitate automated model exchange value is drawn from a normal distribution with mean willneedtobeextendedtofacilitateautomateddataex- logθ and standard deviation σ specified by desired i logθi change. Σ.) Foreachparameterset,theErktimecoursewascalEvery one of the 17 systems biology models we stud- culated, and at each timepoint the shaded regions in the ied exhibits a sloppy spectrum of parameter sensitivity figure contain the central 95% of the time courses. eigenvalues; they all span many decades roughly evenly and tend not be aligned with single parameters. This striking and apparently universal feature has important consequences for the modeling process. It suggests that D. Software modelers would be wise to try collective parameter fits andtofocusnotonthequalityoftheirparametervalues All computations were performed in the open-source but on the quality of their predictions. modeling environment SloppyCell, version 0.81 [44]. SBML files and SloppyCell scripts to reproduce all presented calculations are in Dataset S1. III. METHODS A. Hessian Computations IV. SUPPORTING INFORMATION Hχ2 can be calculated as Text S1: Stiffest Eigenvectors Hχ2 = 1 (cid:88) 1 (cid:90) Tc dy s,c (θ∗,t)dy s,c (θ∗,t) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) dt. Text S2: Effect of Other Poorly Determined Paramej,k N N T σ2 dlogθ dlogθ (cid:12) ters c s s,c c s 0 j k θ∗ Text S3: Fragility of Other Predictions
(3) Second derivative terms (cid:0) d2y (θ∗,t)/dlogθ dlogθ (cid:1) Text S4: Rescaled Model of Brown et al. s,c i j might be expected, but they vanish because we evalu- TextS5: EigenvalueAnalysisofBrodersenet al.Bindate Hχ2 at θ∗. Equation 3 is convenient because the ing Studies first derivatives dy (θ∗,t)/dlogθ can be calculated by Dataset S1: SBML Files, SloppyCell Scripts, and χ2s,c k integrating sensitivity equations. This avoids the use Hessians of finite-difference derivatives, which are troublesome in sloppy systems. The projections P of the ellipsoids shown in Figi ure 2A onto bare parameter axis i are proportional to A. Accession Numbers
(cid:113)(cid:0) (cid:1) invHχ2 . The intersections I with axis i are proi,i i
(cid:113) Models discussed that are in the BioModportionalto 1/Hχ2,withthesameproportionalitycon- els database [42] are: (a) BIOMD0000000005, i,i stant. (c) BIOMD0000000003, (d) BIOMD0000000035,
(e) BIOMD0000000002, (f) BIOMD0000000010,
(h) BIOMD0000000021, (i) BIOMD0000000033, B. Parameter Uncertainties (k) BIOMD0000000022, (l) BIOMD0000000055,
(n) BIOMD0000000015, (o) BIOMD0000000051, To rescale Hχ2 so that it corresponds to fitting N (p) BIOMD0000000056, (q) BIOMD0000000049. d data points, each with uncertainty a fraction f of the species’ maximal value, we multiply Hχ2 by N /f2. In d thequadraticapproximation,theone-standard-deviation V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS uncertainty in the logarithm of parameter θ after such i a collective fit is given by σ2 = (cid:0) f2/N (cid:1)(cid:0) invHχ2(cid:1) . logθi d i,i We thank Eric Siggia for suggesting study of the The relative size of the 95% confidence interval is then rescaled model of Brown et al. We also thank Rick CeriΣ =exp(4σ )−1. i logθi oneandJonEricksonforsharingtheirbiologicalinsights and John Guckenheimer, Eric Siggia, and Kelvin Lee for helpfuldiscussionsaboutdynamicalsystems. Computing C. Prediction Uncertainties resources were kindly provided by the USDA-ARS plant pathogen systems biology group in Ithaca, NY. Finally, The red and blue prediction uncertainties shown in we thank several anonymous reviewers whose comments Figure 4B were calculated by randomly generating 1000 strengthened the manuscript.
9 VI. FUNDING by a DOE Computational Science Graduate Fellowship. CRM acknowledges support from USDA-ARS project RNG was supported by an NIH Molecular Biophysics 1907-21000-017-05. This work was supported by NSF Training Grant, T32-GM-08267. JJW was supported grant DMR-0218475.
[1] KitanoH(2002)Computationalsystemsbiology. Nature and shape of the steady-state flux space. J Theor Biol
420:206–210. 228:437–447.
[2] Locke JCW, Southern MM, Kozma-Bognr L, Hibberd [18] FamiliI,MahadevanR,PalssonBØ(2005)k-ConeanalV, Brown PE, et al. (2005) Extension of a genetic net- ysis: determiningallcandidatevaluesforkineticparamworkmodelbyiterativeexperimentationandmathemat- eters on a network scale. Biophys J 88:1616–1625. ical analysis. Mol Syst Biol 1:0013. [19] Bailey JE (2001) Complex biology with no parameters.
[3] Voit E, Neves AR, Santos H (2006) The intricate side Nat Biotechnol 19:503–504. of systems biology. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:9452– [20] Brown KS, Sethna JP (2003) Statistical mechanical ap9457. proachestomodelswithmanypoorlyknownparameters.
[4] Aldridge BB, Burke JM, Lauffenburger DA, Sorger PK Phys Rev E 68:021904.
(2006)Physicochemicalmodellingofcellsignallingpath- [21] Brown KS, Hill CC, Calero GA, Myers CR, Lee KH, ways. Nat Cell Biol 8:1195–1203. etal.(2004)Thestatisticalmechanicsofcomplexsignal-
[5] IngramPJ,StumpfMPH,StarkJ(2006)Networkmotifs: ing networks: nerve growth factor signaling. Phys Biol structure does not determine function. BMC Genomics 1:184–195.
7:108. [22] Frederiksen SL, Jacobsen KW, Brown KS, Sethna JP
[6] Mayo AE, Setty Y, Shavit S, Zaslaver A, Alon U (2006) (2004) Bayesian ensemble approach to error estimation Plasticity of the cis-regulatory input function of a gene. of interatomic potentials. Phys Rev Lett 93:165501. PLoS Biol 4:e45. [23] WaterfallJJ,CaseyFP,GutenkunstRN,BrownKS,My-
[7] SachsK,PerezO,Pe’erD,LauffenburgerDA,NolanGP ersCR,etal.(2006)Sloppy-modeluniversalityclassand
(2005) Causal protein-signaling networks derived from the Vandermonde matrix. Phys Rev Lett 97:150601. multiparameter single-cell data. Science 308:523–529. [24] Faller D, Klingmuller U, Timmer J (2003) Simulation
[8] MaerklSJ,QuakeSR(2007)Asystemsapproachtomea- methods for optimal experimental design in systems bisuringthebindingenergylandscapesoftranscriptionfac- ology. Simulation 79:717–725. tors. Science 315:233–237. [25] Zak DE, Gonye GE, Schwaber JS, Doyle FJ III (2003)
[9] Minton AP (2001) The influence of macromolecular Importance of input perturbations and stochastic gene crowding and macromolecular confinement on biochem- expressioninthereverseengineeringofgeneticregulatory ical reactions in physiological media. J Biol Chem networks: insights from an identifiability analysis of an
276:10577–10580. in silico network. Genome Res 13:2396–2405.
[10] Teusink B, Passarge J, Reijenga CA, Esgalhado E, [26] GadkarKG,VarnerJ,DoyleFJIII(2005)Modelidentivan der Weijden CC, et al. (2000) Can yeast glycolysis fication of signal transduction networks from data using be understood in terms of in vitro kinetics of the con- a state regulator problem. IEEE Syst Biol 2:17–30. stituent enzymes? Testing biochemistry. Eur J Biochem [27] Casey FP, Baird D, Feng Q, Gutenkunst RN, Water267:5313–5329. fall JJ, et al. (2007) Optimal experimental design in an
[11] MendesP,KellD(1998)Non-linearoptimizationofbio- epidermal growth factor receptor signalling and downchemical pathways: applications to metabolic engineer- regulation model. IET Syst Biol 1:190–202. ing and parameter estimation. Bioinformatics 14:869– [28] Tyson JJ (1991) Modeling the cell division cycle: cdc2
883. and cyclin interactions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
[12] Jaqaman K, Danuser G (2006) Linking data to models: 88:7328–7332. data regression. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7:813–819. [29] Zwolak JW, Tyson JJ, Watson LT (2005) Globally opti-
[13] Brodersen R, Nielsen F, Christiansen JC, Andersen K mised parameters for a model of mitotic control in frog
(1987)Characterizationofbindingequilibriumdatabya egg extracts. Syst Biol (Stevenage) 152:81–92. varietyoffittedisotherms. EurJBiochem169:487–495. [30] Goldbeter A (1991) A minimal cascade model for the
[14] Rodriguez-Fernandez M, Mendes P, Banga JR (2006) A mitotic oscillator involving cyclin and cdc2 kinase. Proc hybrid approach for efficient and robust parameter es- Natl Acad Sci USA 88:9107–9111. timation in biochemical pathways. Biosystems 83:248– [31] VilarJMG,KuehHY,BarkaiN,LeiblerS(2002)Mecha265. nismsofnoise-resistanceingeneticoscillators. ProcNatl
[15] ChoKH,ShinSY,KolchW,WolkenhauerO(2003)Ex- Acad Sci USA 99:5988–5992. perimentaldesigninsystemsbiology,basedonparameter [32] EdelsteinSJ,SchaadO,HenryE,BertrandD,Changeux sensitivityanalysisusingaMonteCarlomethod: Acase JP(1996)Akineticmechanismfornicotinicacetylcholine studyfortheTNFα-mediatedNF-κBsignaltransduction receptors based on multiple allosteric transitions. Biol pathway. Simulation 79:726–739. Cybern 75:361–379.
[16] FellD(1997)UnderstandingtheControlofMetabolism. [33] Kholodenko BN (2000) Negative feedback and ultraLondon: Ashgate Publishing, 300 pp. sensitivity can bring about oscillations in the mitogen-
[17] Wiback S, Famili I, Greenberg HJ, Palsson BØ (2004) activated protein kinase cascades. Eur J Biochem MonteCarlosamplingcanbeusedtodeterminethesize 267:1583–1588.
10
[34] Lee E, Salic A, Kru¨ger R, Heinrich R, Kirschner MW in budding yeast. Mol Biol Cell 15:3841–3862.
(2003) The roles of APC and Axin derived from exper- [41] SasagawaS,OzakiY,FujitaK,KurodaS(2005)Predicimental and theoretical analysis of the Wnt pathway. tion and validation of the distinct dynamics of transient PLoS Biol 1:e10. andsustainedERKactivation. NatCellBiol7:365–373.
[35] LeloupJC,GoldbeterA(1999)Chaosandbirhythmicity [42] Le Nov`ere N, Bornstein B, Broicher A, Courtot M, inamodelforcircadianoscillationsofthePERandTIM Donizelli M, et al. (2006) BioModels Database: a free, proteins in drosophila. J Theor Biol 198:445–459. centralized database of curated, published, quantitative
[36] von Dassow G, Meir E, Munro EM, Odell GM (2000) kinetic models of biochemical and cellular systems. NuThesegmentpolaritynetworkisarobustdevelopmental cleic Acids Res 34:D689–691. module. Nature 406:188–192. [43] Hucka M, Finney A, Sauro HM, Bolouri H, Doyle JC,
[37] Ueda HR, Hagiwara M, Kitano H (2001) Robust oscilla- et al. (2003) The systems biology markup language tionswithintheinterlockedfeedbackmodelofDrosophila (SBML): a medium for representation and exchange of circadian rhythm. J Theor Biol 210:401–406. biochemicalnetworkmodels.Bioinformatics19:524–531.
[38] CurtoR,VoitEO,SorribasA,CascanteM(1998)Math- [44] Gutenkunst RN, Casey FP, Waterfall JJ, Atlas JC, ematical models of purine metabolism in man. Math Kuczenski RS, et al. Sloppycell. http://sloppycell. Biosci 151:1–49. sourceforge.net.
[39] Chassagnole C, Noisommit-Rizzi N, Schmid JW, Mauch [45] Mehta ML (2004) Random Matrices. Amsterdam: AcaK,ReussM(2002)Dynamicmodelingofthecentralcar- demic Press, 3rd edition, 706 pp. bon metabolism of Escherichia coli. Biotechnol Bioeng [46] Waterfall JJ (2006) Universality in Multiparameter Fit79:53–73. ting: Sloppy Models. Ph.D. thesis, Cornell University.
[40] ChenKC,CalzoneL,Csikasz-NagyA,CrossFR,Novak [47] This analysis was suggested by Eric Siggia. B, et al. (2004) Integrative analysis of cell cycle control