Methods of Information Theory and Algorithmic Complexity for Network Biology∗ Hector Zenil†, Narsis A. Kiani and Jesper Tegn´er Unit of Computational Medicine, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institute & Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. Abstract We survey and introduce concepts and tools located at the intersectionofinformationtheoryandnetworkbiology. WeshowthatShannon’s informationentropy,compressibilityandalgorithmiccomplexityquantify different local and global aspects of synthetic and biological data. We showexamplessuchastheemergenceofgiantcomponents inErdo¨s-R´enyi randomgraphs,andtherecoveryoftopologicalpropertiesfromnumerical kineticpropertiessimulatinggeneexpressiondata. Weprovideexacttheoretical calculations, numerical approximations and error estimations of entropy,algorithmicprobabilityandKolmogorovcomplexityfordifferent typesofgraphs,characterizingtheirvariantandinvariantproperties. We introduceformaldefinitionsofcomplexityforbothlabeledandunlabeled graphsandprovethattheKolmogorovcomplexityofalabeledgraphisa good approximation of its unlabeled Kolmogorov complexity and thus a robust definition of graph complexity. Keywords: information theory; complex networks; Kolmogorov complexity; algorithmic randomness; algorithmic probability; biological networks.
1 Introduction Overthelastdecadenetworktheoryhasbecomeaunifyinglanguageinbiology, giving rise to whole new areas of research in computational systems biology. Gene networks are conceptual models of genetic regulation where each gene is considered to be directly affected by a number of other genes, and are usually represented by directed graphs.
∗Dr. Ali Masoudi-Nejad, sole Guest Editor for this paper. Forthcoming in the journal of Seminars for Developmental Cell Biology special issue on Information Theory in Molecular Biology.
†Correspondingauthor: hector[dot]zenil[at]algorithmicnaturelab[dot]org
1
5102 ceD
11
]NM.oib-q[
7v4063.1041:viXra
Classicalinformationtheoryhasforsometimebeenappliedtonetworks,but Shannon entropy, like any other computable measure (i.e. one that is a total function, returning an output in finite time for every input), is not invariant to changes of object description [45]. More recently, algorithmic information theory has been introduced as a tool for use in network theory, and some interesting properties have been found [40,
42,46]. For example, in [40] correlations were reported among algebraic and topologicalpropertiesofsyntheticandbiologicalnetworksbymeansofalgorithmic complexity, and an application to classify networks by type was developed in [42]. We review and explore further these information content approaches for characterizingbiologicalnetworksandnetworksingeneral. Weprovidetheoretical estimations of the error of approximations to the Kolmogorov complexity of graphs and complex networks, offering both exact and numerical approximations. Together with [40] and [42], the methods introduced here represent a novel view and constitute a formal approach to graph complexity, while providing a new set of tools for the analysis of the local and global structure of networks.
1.1 Graph notation and complex networks A graph G is labeled when the vertices are distinguished by names such as u ,u ,...u with n = |V(G)|. Graphs G and H are said to be isomorphic if
1 2 n there is a bijection between the vertex sets of G and H, λ : V(G) → V(H) such that any two vertices u and v ∈ G are adjacent in G if and only if λ(u) and λ(v) are adjacent in H. When G and H are the same graph, the bijection is referred to as an automorphism of G. The adjacency matrix of a graph is not an invariant under graph relabelings. Fig. 1 shows two adjacency matrices for isomorphic graphs. A canonical form of G is a labeled graph Canon(G) that is isomorphic to G, such that every graph that is isomorphic to G has the same canonical form as G. An advantage of Canon(G) is that unlike A(G), A(Canon(G)) is a graph invariant of Canon(G) [1]. One of the most basic properties of graphs is the number of links per node. When all nodes have the same number of links, the graph is said to be regular. The degree of a node v, denoted by d(v), is the number of (incoming and outgoing) links to other nodes. We will also say that a graph is planar if it can be drawninaplanewithoutitsedgescrossing. Planarityisaninterestingproperty because only planar graphs have duals. A dual graph of a planar graph G is a graph that has a vertex corresponding to each face of G, and an edge joining two neighboring faces for each edge in G. Apopulartypeofgraphthathasbeenstudiedistheso-calledErd¨os-R´enyi [12,
14] (ER) graph, in which vertices are randomly and independently connected by links with a fixed probability (also called edge density) (see Fig. 2 for a comparison between a regular and a random graph of the same size). The probability of vertices being connected is called the edge probability. The main characteristicofrandomgraphsisthatallnodeshaveroughlythesamenumber
2
Figure 1: Isomorphic graphs with two different adjacency matrix representations, illustrating that the adjacency matrix is not an invariant of a graph under relabelings. However, similar graphs have adjacency matrices with similar algorithmic information content. Figure 2: Examples of two regular graphs (left and middle) are a 2n circular graph with 20 nodes and a complete graph with 20 nodes, both of whose descriptions are very short, hence K(G) ∼ log|V(G)| ∼ 4.32 bits. In contrast, a random graph (right) with the same number of nodes and number of links requires more information to be specified, because there is no simple rule connecting the nodes and therefore K(G)∼|E(G)|=30 bits.
3
of links, equal to the average number of links per node. A ER graph G(n,p) is a graph of size n constructed by connecting nodes randomly with probability p independent from every other edge. Usually ER graphs are assumed to be non-recursive (i.e. truly random), but ER graphs can be constructed recursively with, for example, pseudo-random algorithms. Here we will assume that ER graphs are non-recursive, as theoretical comparisons and bounds hold only in the non-recursive case. For numerical estimations, however, we use a pseudo-random edge connection algorithm, in keeping with common practice. ERrandomgraphshavesomeinterestingproperties,butbiologicalnetworks are not random. They carry information, connections between certain elements in a biological graph are favored or avoided, and not all vertices have the same probabilityofbeingconnectedtoothervertices. Thetwomostpopularcomplex networkmodelsconsistoftwoalgorithmsthatreproducecertaincharacteristics found in empirical networks. Indeed, the field has been driven largely by the observation of properties that depart from properties modeled by regular and random graphs. Specifically, there are two topological properties of many complexnetworksthathavebeenafocusofinterest. Asimple graph isagraphwith no self-loops and no multi-edges. Throughout this paper we will only consider simple graphs. A network is considered a small-world graph G (e.g. see Fig. 3) if the average graph distance D grows no faster than the log of the number of nodes: D ∼logV(G). Manynetworksarescale-free,meaningthattheirdegreesaresize independent, in the sense that the empirical degree distribution is independent of the size of the graph up to a logarithmic term. That is, the proportion of vertices with degree k is proportional to γkτ for some τ >1 and constant γ. In other words, many empirical networks display a power-law degree distribution. Figure3: Forp=0,WS isaregulargraphthatrequireslittleinformationtobe described. For rewiring probability p = 1, WS becomes a random graph that requires about as much information in bits as the number of edges in WS (i.e. K(WS) ∼ |E(WS)|). For p very close to zero, however, the average network distanceamongnodesdropsdramatically,approachingthatoftherandomgraph casewhileremainingoflowcomplexity(littleinformationisrequiredtodescribe K(WS)∼log|V(WS)|+(cid:15)(|V(WS)|)), close to the regular WS for p=0.
4
2 Classical information theory and linear complexity Central to information theory is the concept of Shannon’s information entropy, which quantifies the average number of bits needed to store or communicate a message. Shannon’s entropy determines that one cannot store (and therefore communicate) a symbol with n different symbols in less than log(n) bits. In this sense, Shannon’s entropy determines a lower limit below which no message canbefurthercompressed,noteveninprinciple. Anotherapplication(orinterpretation) of Shannon’s information theory is as a measure for quantifying the uncertainty involvedinpredictingthevalueofarandomvariable. Forexample, specifying the outcome of a fair coin flip (two equally likely outcomes) requires one bit at a time, because the results are independent and therefore each result conveysmaximumentropy. Thingsbegintogetinterestingwhenthecoinisnot fair. If one considers a coin with heads on both obverse and reverse, then the tossing experiment always results in heads, and the message will always be 1 with full ceryainty. For an ensemble X(R,p(x )), where R is the set of possible outcomes (the i randomvariable), n=|R| and p(x )is the probabilityofan outcomeinR. The i Shannon information content or entropy of X is then given by n
(cid:88) H(X)=− p(x )log p(x ) (Eq. 1) i 2 i i=1 Which implies that to calculate H(X) one has to know or assume the mass distributionprobabilityofensembleX. OnecaveatregardingShannon’sentropy isthatoneisforcedtomakeanarbitrarychoiceregardinggranularity. Takefor example the bit string 01010101010101. The Shannon entropy of the string at the level of single bits is maximal, as there are the same number of 1s and 0s, but the string is clearly regular when two-bit blocks are taken as basic units, in which instance the string has minimal complexity because it contains only 1 symbol(01)fromamongthe4possibleones(00,01,10,11). Onewaytoovercome this problem is to take into consideration all possible “granularities” (we call this Block entropy), from length 1 to n, where n is the length of the sequence. This measure is related to what’s also called predictive information or excess entropy (the differences among the entropies for consecutive block sizes). To proceed by means of block entropy is computationally expensive, as compared to fixing the block size to n, as it entails producing all possible overlapping
(cid:0)i(cid:1) n substrings for all i∈{1,...,n}. Shannonentropycanalsobeappliedtothenodedegreesequenceofagraph. The Shannon entropy of an unlabeled network as described by its degree distribution can be described by the same formula for Shannon entropy where the random variable is a degree distribution. The chief advantage of so doing being thatitisinvarianttorelabelings. Thisalsomeansthatthedegreedistributionis not a lossless representation of a labeled network (but of its isomorphic group), and is an interesting entropic measure but can only be used when the node
5
labels are not relevant. For example, in a causal recursive network, the node labels may represent time events in a sequence that has a meaning captured in the network labeling, in which case the degree distribution sequence (where no agreement has been reached on the order of the elements in the distribution sequence, which is therefore disordered) cannot be used to reconstruct the original network represented by the unlabeled version or the isomorphism group of the labeled networks. It is also clear that the concept of entropy rate cannot be applied to the degree distribution, because the node degree sequence has no particular order oranyorderismeaninglessbecauseanylabelnumberingwillbearbitrary. This also means that Shannon entropy is not invariant to the description of a network,especiallyasalabeledoranunlabelednetwork,exceptforclearlyextreme cases(e.g. fullydisconnectedandcompletelyconnectednetworksbothhaveflat degreedistributionsandthereforelowestShannonentropybothdegreesequence and adjacency matrix density). A review and comparison of these entropic measures is provided in [10] in connection to applications of drug and chemical structures. An interesting proposal related to algorithmic complexity is a measure of linear matrix complexity [29] based on the number of operations needed to produce a matrix. This is similar to finding the generating basis (a lossless description of a labelled graph) of an adjacency matrix A, such that XM = A with X a proper vector such that XM ≤ A. XM ≤ A is an upper bound to the Kolmogorov complexity if a labelled graph G with adjacency matrix A. Effectively, the null space, kernel or vector space basis that generates the adjacency matrix is a smaller computer program that generates the adjacency matrix. This kind of complexity is linear because the matrix could be reduced to non-linear combinations. Indeed, the nullspace is not the shortest possible program to produce A.
3 Algorithmic information and network biology DNAsequencesstoretheinformationrequiredtoproducetheproteinsneededby living organisms, among other information regulating underlying mechanisms, and are therefore expected to be removed from randomness. Likewise, biological networks carry information, transfer information from one region to another, and implement functions represented by the element’s interactions. Connections among elements in a biological network are therefore removed both from triviality and randomness. In a biological network, nodes usually represent proteins, metabolites, genes, transcription factors, etc. A link represents the interactions between the nodes in a network that can correspond to protein-protein binding interactions, metabolic coupling or regulation. The Shannon entropy (or simply entropy) of a graph G is simply defined by n
(cid:88) H(A(G))=− P(A(x ))log P(A(x )) (Eq. 2) i 2 i i=1
6
whereGistherandomvariablewithnpossibleoutcomes(allpossibleadjacency matrices of size |V(G)|). For example, a completely disconnected graph G with alladjacencymatrixentriesequaltozerohasentropyH(A(G))=0,becausethe numberofdifferentsymbolsintheadjacencymatrixis1. However,ifadifferent number of 1s and 0s occur in A(G), then H(A(G))(cid:54)=0. In general we will use Blockentropyinordertodetectmoregraphregularities(throughtheadjacency matrix) at a greater resolution. But for Block entropy there is an extra factor to be taken into account. The unlabeled calculation of the Block entropy (not relevant for 1-bit entropy) of a graph has to take into consideration all possible adjacencymatrixrepresentationsforallpossiblelabelings. Therefore,theBlock entropy of a graph is given by: H(G)=min{H(A(g ))|G ∈L(G)} (Eq. 3) L L where L(G) is the group of all possible labelings of G. Likewise, thedegreeofanodeinabiologicalnetworkofproteininteractions represents the number of proteins with which it interacts, and its Shannon entropy does not require a labeling version because the degree sequence is an invariant of the graph isomorphic group. Other entropic measures of network elements are possible and have been proposed before but they all require to focus on a particular graph element
(adjacencymatrix,degreesequence,numberofbifurcations)andtheydonotall convergemeaningthatShannonentropyisnotinvarianttodifferentdescriptions of the same object. Another powerful measure of information content and randomness, with which to find not only statistical but recursive regularities, is the concept of Kolmogorov complexity [8,20]—denoted by K. This is because K has been proven to be a universal measure theoretically guaranteed to asymptotically identify any computable regularity [36], i.e. a regularity that can be reproduced byalgorithmicmeanssuchasacomputerprogramorTuringmachine. Formally, the Kolmogorov complexity of a string s is K(s)=min{|p|:U(p)=s} (Eq. 4) that is, the length (in bits) of the shortest program p that when running on a universal Turing machine U outputs s upon halting. A universal Turing machine U is an abstraction of a general-purpose computer that can be programmed to reproduce any computable object, such as a string or a network (e.g. the elements of an adjacency matrix). By the invariance theorem [7,24], K only depends on U up to a constant, so as U is conventional, the U subscript can be dropped. Formally, ∃γ such that
|K (s)−K (s)|<γ where γ is a constant independent of U and U(cid:48). Because U U(cid:48) everything in the theory of Kolmogorov complexity is meant to be asymptotic, this invariance theorem means that the longer the string s the closer the Kolmogorov complexity evaluations, even for different Turing machines U and U(cid:48), and at the limit (for |s|→∞) the evaluations will coincide.
7
Duetoitspower,Kcomesburdenedwithatechnicalinconvenience(formally called semi-computability) and it has been proven that no effective algorithm exists which takes a string s as input and produces the exact integer K(s) as output [8,20]. This is related to a common problem in computer science known as the undecidability of the halting problem [32]—referring to the ability to know whether or not a computation will eventually stop. Despite the inconvenience, K can be effectively approximated by using, for example, compression algorithms. Kolmogorov complexity can alternatively be understood in terms of uncompressibility. If an object, such as a biological network, is highly compressible, then K is small and the object is said to be non-random. However, if the object is uncompressible then it is considered algorithmically random. A compression ratio, also related to the randomness deficiency of a network or how removed an object is from maximum algorithmic randomness, will be definedbyC(G)=Comp(G)/|A(G)|,whereComp(G)isthecompressedlength in bits of the adjacency matrix G of a network using a lossless compression algorithm (e.g. Compress), and |A(G)| is the size of the adjacency matrix measuredbytakingthedimensionsofthearrayandmultiplyingitsvalues. e.g., if the adjacency matrix is 10 × 10, then |A(G)| = 100. It is worth mentioning that compressibility is a sufficient test for non-randomness. Which means that it does not matter which lossless compression algorithm is used, if an object canbecompressedthenitisavalidupperboundofitsKolmogorovcomplexity. Which in turn means that the choice of lossless compression algorithm is not very important, because one can test them one by one and always retain the best compression as an approximation to K. A lossless compression algorithm isanalgorithmthatincludesadecompressionalgorithmthatretrievestheexact original object, without any lossof information whendecompressed. The closer C(G) is to 1 the less compressible, and the closer to 0 the more compressible. In Table 1, Kolmogorov approximations by compression of 22 metabolic networks from [16], including the Streptococcus pyogenes network, have been calculated.
3.1 Algorithmic probability Another seminal concept in the theory of algorithmic information, is the concept of algorithmic probability [23,36] and its related so-called Universal distribution [17], also known as “Levin’s probability semi-measure” [23]. Thealgorithmicprobabilityofastringsprovidestheprobabilitythatavalid random program p written in bits uniformly distributed produces the string s when run on a universal (prefix-free 1) Turing machine U. Formally,
(cid:88) m(s)= 1/2|p| (Eq. 5) p:U(p)=s
1The group of valid programs forms a prefix-free set (no element is a prefix of any other, apropertynecessarytokeep0<m(s)<1.) Fordetailssee[7,9].
8
That is, the sum over all the programs p for which U outputs s and halts. The algorithmic probability measure m(s) is related to Kolmogorov complexity K(s) in that m(s) is at least the maximum term in the summation of programs, given that the shortest program carries the greatest weight in the sum. The algorithmic Coding Theorem [23] further establishes the connection between m(s) and K(s) as follows:
|−log m(s)−K(s)|<O(1) (Eq. 6)
2 whereO(1)isanadditivevalueindependentofs. TheCodingTheoremimplies that [7,9] one can estimate the Kolmogorov complexity of a string from its frequency. By rewriting Eq. (5) as: K (s)=−log m(s)+O(1) (Eq. 7) m 2 one can see that it is possible to approximate K by approximating m (which is whyitisdenotedK ),withtheaddedadvantagethatm(s)ismoresensitiveto m smallobjects[11]thanthetraditionalapproachtoK usinglosslesscompression algorithms,whichtypicallyperformpoorlyforsmallobjects(e.g. smallgraphs).
3.2 Kolmogorov complexity of unlabeled graphs As shown in [40], estimations of Kolmogorov complexity are able to distinguish complex from random networks (of the same size, or growing asymptotically), which are both in turn distinguished from regular graphs (also of the same size). K calculated by the BDM assigns low Kolmogorov complexity to regular graphs, medium complexity to complex networks following Watts-Strogatz or Barab´asi-Albert algorithms, and higher Kolmogorov complexity to random networks. That random graphs are the most algorithmically complex is clear from a theoretical point of view: nearly all long binary strings are algorithmically random, and so nearly all random unlabeled graphs are algorithmically random[6],whereKolmogorovcomplexityisusedtogiveaproofofthenumber ofunlabeledgraphsasafunctionofitsrandomnessdeficiency(howfaritisfrom the maximum value of K(G)). The Coding Theorem Method (CTM) [11,34] is rooted in the relation provided by algorithmic probability between frequency of production of a string from a random program and its Kolmogorov complexity (Eq. (6). It is also called the algorithmic Coding theorem, to contrast it with another coding theorem in classical information theory). Essentially it uses the fact that the more frequent a string (or object), the lower its Kolmogorov complexity; and strings of lower frequency have higher Kolmogorov complexity. In [40], numerical evidence was provided in support of the theoretical assumptionthat theKolmogorovcomplexity ofan unlabeledgraphshould notbe far removed from that of any of its labeled versions. This is because there is a small computer program of fixed size that should determine the order of the labeling proportional to the size of the isomorphism group. Indeed, when the
9
isomorphism group is large, the labeled networks have more equivalent descriptions given by the symmetries, and would therefore, according to algorithmic probability, be of lower Kolmogorov complexity.
3.3 Reconstructing K from local graph algorithmic patterns Theapproachtodeterminingthealgorithmiccomplexityofagraphthusinvolves consideringhowoftentheadjacencymatrixofamotifisgeneratedbyarandom Turing machine on a 2-dimensional array, also called a termite or Langton’s ant [21]. We call this the Block Decomposition Method (BDM) as it requires the partition of the adjacency matrix of a graph into smaller matrices using which we can numerically calculate its algorithmic probability by running a large set of small 2-dimensional deterministic Turing machines, and then, by applyingthealgorithmicCodingtheorem,itsKolmogorovcomplexity. Thenthe overallcomplexityoftheoriginaladjacencymatrixisthesumofthecomplexity of its parts, albeit with a logarithmic penalization for repetitions, given that n repetitions of the same object only adds logn to its overall complexity, as one can simply describe a repetition in terms of the multiplicity of the first occurrence. Moreformally,theKolmogorovcomplexityofalabeledgraphGby means of BDM is defined as follows:
(cid:88) K (G,d)= log (n )+K (r ) (1) BDM 2 u m u
(ru,nu)∈A(G)d×d where K (r ) is the approximation of the Kolmogorov complexity of the subm u arrays r arrived at by using the algorithmic Coding theorem (Eq. (6)), while u A(G) represents the set with elements (r ,n ), obtained by decomposing d×d u u the adjacency matrix of G into non-overlapping squares of size d by d. In each
(r ,n ) pair, r is one such square and n its multiplicity (number of occuru u u u rences). From now on K (g,d = 4) will be denoted only by K(G), but BDM it should be taken as an approximation to K(G) unless otherwise stated (e.g. when taking the theoretical true K(G) value). Once CTM is calculated, BDM can be implemented as a lookup table, and hence runs efficiently in linear time for non-overlapping fixed size submatrices. As with Block entropy (c.f. Section 3), the Kolmogorov complexity of a graph G is given by: K(cid:48)(G)=min{K(A(G ))|G ∈L(G)} (Eq. 8) L L where L(G) is the group of all possible labelings of G and G a particular L labeling. In fact K(G) provides a choice for graph canonization, taking the adjacency matrix of G with the lowest Kolmogorov complexity. Because it may not be unique, it can be combined with the smallest lexicographical representation when the adjacency matrix is concatenated by rows, as is traditionally done for graph canonization.
10
By taking subarrays of the adjacency matrix we ensure that network motifs
(overrepresented graphs), used in biology and proven to classify superfamilies of networks [3,27], are taken into consideration in the BDM calculation. And indeed, we were able to show that BDM alone classifies the same superfamilies of networks [42] that classical network motifs were able to identify. Of course the time complexity of the calculation of K(cid:48)(G) is a matter of concern. The graph isomorphism problem involves constructing an ‘efficient’
(subexponential)algorithmfortestingwhethertwogivengraphsareisomorphic. ThegraphisomorphismproblemisbelievedtobeinNP.Theproblemoftesting labeled graphs for isomorphism is polynomially equivalent to the graph isomorphism problem, and therefore the calculation of K(cid:48)(G) cannot be expected to have a polynomial time algorithm. We will see, however, that |K(G)−K(cid:48)(G)| is bounded by a constant independent of G.
4 Small patterns in biological networks One important development in network biology is the concept of network motifs [4,39], defined as recurrent and statistically significant sub-graphs found in networks, as compared to a uniform distribution in a random network. As is to be expected, biological networks are not random networks, because biological networks carry information necessary for an organism to develop. Motifs are believed to be of signal importance largely because they may reflect functional properties. For example, the function of the so-called FFL (Feed-Forward Loop) has been speculated to be a more stable transmitter of information among genes than other possible small network arrangements [3]. This motif consists of three genes: a regulator that regulates another regulator and a gene, this latter regulated by the two regulators (given that each of the regulatory interactions can be either an activation or a repression, this motif can be divided into 8 more refined subtypes). This 3-node motif has been found in E. coli [25,33], yeast [22,27], and other organisms [5,15,28,30,35,37]. Other motifs have been identifiedwithvarietiesofmemoryswitchestocontrolanddelayactions,among other possible useful biological functions. FFLs are only one class of network motif among 4 that have been identified [3]. The simplest kind of motif is the positive and negative autoregulation
(with a self-loop as motif), abbreviated NAR and PAR respectively. There are also Single-input modules (SIM) and Dense overlapping regulons (DOR) or Multi-input motifs (MIMs). The SIM is a regulator that regulates a group of genes with no other regulator in between (with the only regulator regulating itself), and is identified with a coordinated expression function of a group of geneswhosesharedfunctioniscapableofgeneratingatemporalexpressionprogramandactivationorderwithdifferentthresholdsforeachregulatedgene. The DORs have been identified with a gate-array, carrying out a computation from multiple inputs through multiple outputs. Asaproof-of-principle,wehavepreviouslyshownthattopologicalproperties
11
of complex networks are indeed detected by approximations to K [40]. For Kolmogorov complexity, for example, the simplest possible motif is that which connects all nodes bi-directionally, which is consistent with the idea that such a motif would be biologically meaningless (unless assigning weights indicating levels of regulation). There is a debate, however, as to whether motif analysis is living up to its promise of breaking down complex biological networks in order to understand them in terms of minimal functions carried by these motifs. Indeed it has been suggested that the motif approach to networks has important limits (e.g. [19]). Evenwhentherearesomeknownfactsabouthowclassesofmotifsconnectto each other, such as FFLs and SIMs integrated into DORs and DORs occurring in a single layer (there is no DOR at the output of another DOR) [3], we think thestudyofmotifsandfullnetworksarenotalternativesbutarecomplementary approaches,asonecannotreconstructglobalpatternsfromlocalrepetitions,nor local patterns from global properties.
5 Compressibility of biological networks We know that for a random (Erd¨os-R´enyi) graph G, K(G) ∼ |E(G)| =
(cid:0)n(cid:1)
,
2 because edges being placed at random need to be described one by one in order to reconstruct the network from its “compressed” description without loss of information. Likewise,acompletegraphcofsize|V(c)|willhaveaKolmogorov complexity K(c) = log |V(c)|, because its description is trivial–everything is
2 connected–andonlythesizeofacompletegraphisneededinordertoreproduce it in full. This means that a statistical (Erd¨os-R´enyi) graph is also algorithmically(Kolmogorov)randomifitisnotproducedrecursively(e.g. producedbyan algorithm) but by a random process (most random computer-generated graphs are actually simulations of valid statistically random graphs), while a regular
(e.g. a complete) graph has the lowest Kolmogorov complexity. Any other type of graph will lie between these theoretical extremes, so we can expect biological networkstohaveintermediatevaluesbetweensimplicityandmaximumalgorithmic randomness, or in other words, we can expect their randomness deficiency to be removed both from simplicity and randomness. As shown in Table. 1, Kolmogorov approximation values by incompressibility (denoted by C) lie right between the two extreme cases, fully connected
(c) (or fully disconnected) graphs, because the size of the complete graph c is equal to G; and randomized graphs (denoted by r) are those constructed by randomly rewiring the network in a way that preserves the original degree distribution of G. That biological networks are neither random nor simple captures the fact that they contain non-trivial information as models or descriptions of non-stochastic processes of the living systems they represent. In other words, a biological network G has Kolmogorov complexity K(G) such that 0 ∼ K(c ) < K(G) < K(r ) ∼ 1, where r is a random-
|V(G)| |V(G)| |V(G)| ized version of G and c the complete graph of size |V(G)|. For example,
|V(G)| the Streptococcus pyogenes metabolic network with only ∼ 2500 links reaches
12
Table 1: Compression lengths (using Deflate) of a sample of 20 metabolic networks where |V(G)| is the number of vertices of G, |E(G)| the number of edges of G, C(c ) the compressed size of the adjacency matrix of the complete
|V(G)| graphwithnumberofnodesequalto|V(G)|,C(G)thecompressedsizeofA(G), andC(r )thecompressedsizeoftheadjacencymatrixofarandomizednet-
|V(G)| workrbuiltwiththesamenumberofverticesasGandalsofollowingthedegree distribution of G. Networks are sorted by C(G). Network (G) |V(G)| |E(G)| C(c ) C(G) C(r )
|V(G)| |V(G)| Chlamydia Pneumoniae 387 792 0.0020 0.032 0.90 Mycoplasma Pneumoniae 411 936 0.0018 0.034 0.89 Chlamydia Trachomatis 447 941 0.0015 0.029 0.88 Rickettsia Prowazekii 456 1014 0.0014 0.030 0.89 Mycoplasma Genitalium 473 1060 0.0013 0.029 0.89 Treponema Pallidum 485 1117 0.0013 0.028 0.89 Aeropyrum Pernix 490 1163 0.0012 0.029 0.89 Oryza Sativa 665 1514 0.00068 0.022 0.92 Arabidopsis Thaliana 694 1593 0.00062 0.020 0.93 Pyrococcus Furiosus 751 1768 0.00058 0.019 0.95 Pyrococcus Horikoshii 767 1796 0.00055 0.018 0.95 Thermotoga Maritima 830 1980 0.00047 0.018 0.96 Emericella Nidulans 916 2176 0.00039 0.016 0.98 Chlorobium Tepidum 918 2159 0.00039 0.016 0.98 Helicobacter Pylori 949 2325 0.00036 0.016 0.98 Campylobacter Jejuni 946 2257 0.00036 0.016 0.97 Neisseria Meningitidis 981 2393 0.00034 0.015 0.99 Porphyromonas Gingivalis 1010 2348 0.00032 0.014 1.0 Enterococcus Faecalis 1004 2462 0.00032 0.016 1.0 Streptococcus Pyogenes 1051 2577 0.00030 0.014 1.0 greater complexity than the corresponding random graph for the same number ofedges,andliesbetweenthesimplestcases(disconnectedandcompletegraphs) and random graphs reaching a compression ratio of 1. With only 2577 links, however, the complexity of the Streptococcus pyogenes network is far removed fromsimplicityandisclosertoalgorithmicrandomness(seeTable1). InFig.4, a simulation of a random ER graph of the size of the Streptococcus pyogenes network was undertaken. It can be seen that lossless compressions follow the entropy curve trend very accurately, as they are actually implementations of variations of an entropic measure, given the way they are designed (based on dictionaries that can only see statistical patterns). The BDM, on the other hand, is truly algorithmic and provides a richer picture of the graph trajectory.
13
6 Robustness of Kolmogorov graph complexity Despite the complexity of the calculation of unlabeled complexity K(cid:48), regular graphshave beenshowntohavelowK andrandomgraphshave beenshownto havehighK estimations,withgraphswithalargersetofautomorphismshaving lower K than graphs with a smaller set of automorphisms [40]. An important question is how accurate a labeled estimation of K(G) is with respect to the unlabeledK(cid:48)(G),especiallybecauseinthegeneralcasethecalculationofK(G) is computationally cheap as compared to K(cid:48)(G), which carries an exponential overhead. However, the difference |K(G)−K(cid:48)(G)| is bounded by a constant. Indeed, there exists an algorithm α of fixed length size |α| bits such that one cancomputeallL(G)relabelingsofG,evenifbybrute-force,e.g. byproducing all the indicated adjacency matrix row and column permutations. Therefore
|K(G)−K(G )| < |α| for any relabeled graph G of G, or in other words, L L K(G ) = K(cid:48)(G)+|α|, where |α| is independent of G. Notice, of course, that L here the time complexity of α believed to not be in P is irrelevant; what is needed for the proof is that it exists and is therefore of finite size. We can thereforesafelyestimatetheunlabeledK(cid:48)(G)byestimatingalabeledK(G )as L an accurate asymptotic approximation. In fact brute-force is likely the shortest program description to produce all relabelings, and therefore the best choice to minimize α. This result is relevant, first because it means one can accurately estimate K (G) through K(G) for any lossless representation of G up to an additive L term. OneproblemisthatthisdoesnottellustherateofconvergenceofK(G) to K (G). But numerical estimations show that the convergence is in practice L fast. For example, the median of the BDM estimations of all the isomorphic graphsofthegraphinFig.1is31.7,withastandarddeviationof0.72. However, whengeneratingagraph, theBDMmedianis27.26andthestandarddeviation
2.93, clearlyindicatingastatisticaldifference. Butmoreimportantly, theprobability of a random graph having a large automorphism group count is low, as shownin[40],whichisconsistentwithwhatwewouldexpectofthealgorithmic probabilityofarandomgraph–alowfrequencyofproductionasaresultofrunning a turmite Turing machine. And here and in [40] we have also shown that graphs and their dual and cospectral versions have similar Kolmogorov complexityvaluesascalculatedbyalgorithmicprobability(BDM),henceindicating that in practice the convergence guaranteed by the result in this section is fast.
6.1 K(G) is not a graph invariant of G K(G) may be a computationally cheap to approximate up to a bounded error that vanishes in the size of the graph. However, K(G) does not uniquely determine G. Indeed, two non-isomorphic graphs G and H can have K(G)=K(H). In fact the algorithmic Coding theorem gives an estimation of how often this happens, and it is also related to a simple Pigeonhole argument. Indeed, if G or H are algorithmically (Kolmogorov) random graphs, then the probability that K(G) = K(H) grows exponentially. If G and H are complex, then their
14
algorithmic probability ∼1/2K(G) and ∼1/2K(H) is small and are in the tail of the algorithmic probability (the so called Universal distribution or Levin’s semi-measure) distribution ranging across a very small interval of (maximal) Kolmogorov complexity, hence leading to greater chances of value collisions.
7 Detection of graph properties Properties with threshold values are said to exhibit a “phase transition”, due to a principle analogous to the one observed in physical systems. One initial question is whether Kolmogorov complexity can detect the first, most basic tradeoff studied in ER networks, that is, a classical graph phase transition of connectivity. When the graph remains mostly disconnected (i.e. before the phase transition), its Kolmogorov complexity is close to K(G) = log|V|, but as soon as a
“giantcomponent”emergesataboutedgeprobability log|V(G)| accordingtothe V(G) Erd¨os-R´enyitheorem[13], K(G)startsgrowingdrivenby|E|, ascanbeseenin Fig. 4. Erd¨os and R´enyi showed that if V(G)p→c>1, where c is a constant, thenanERrandomgraphGwith
(cid:0)n(cid:1) pedgesonaveragewouldalmostcertainly
2 haveauniquegiantcomponentcontainingapositivefractionofthevertices,and no other component will contain more than O(log(n)) vertices, with V(G)=n and p∼ logn a sharp threshold for the connectedness transition of G(n). n LetP(x)=a x+a x2+...a xn beapolynomialofdegreen>2fittingthe
1 2 n data points x = K(G(p)) of a graph G with edge density p < 0.5 and graph i size |V(G)| = n. Then the phase transition is found in the local minimum of the non-convex fitted curve given by dP(x) d2P(x)
=0 and ≥0 dx dx2 When undertaking the experiment on a large set of ER graphs, the transition is exactly where the inflection point of the local minimum of a fitted curve ofatleastdegree3appearsthatcanbeexposedinbothlogcomplexityandnormalizedplots,asseeninFig.4(toprightandbottomleft). ThisisbecauseK(g) can only grow if non-recursive, i.e. random information is introduced, although what we have in these experiments is recursive pseudo-randomness. Isolated edges remain of low complexity before the emergence of the giant component, andisolatedgraphswouldeventuallyshowrepetitionsiftheyarenotallowedto expand and produce larger components having almost a fourth of the possible numberofedgesbeforethenetworkstartsdecreasingincomplexity. Thissubtle behaviorismoredifficulttorevealifthecomplexityisnormalizedbyaconstant, as in Fig. 4 (top left). Because the threshold is sharp in the phase transition of the giant component, no changes to either the local or global distribution of 1s in the adjacency matrixorchangesintheuniformdistributionofthedegreesequencearedetected bymeasuressuchasShannonentropyorentropyrate. However,foralgorithmic complexity the main feature for the description of the graph emerges, and is
15
Figure 4: Top left: Curves of complexity of a network of 1051 nodes (the size of the Streptococcus pyogenes metabolic network) when varying the number of edges from 0 to the complete graph with 551775 links, normalized by a constant. The maximum complexity is reached when for
(cid:0)n(cid:1)
/2, i.e. edge density
2
50%. Top right: Complexity of an averaged curve of 10 ER graphs of size 100 nodes as a function of edge density normalized by a edge count. The curve is negatively skewed due to the connectivity phase transition upon emergence of the “giant component” (growing K). Bottom left: Complexity curves of three ER graphs (10 replicates each) of growing size (100, 200 and 500) showing that the maximum complexity after the emergence of the giant component asymptoticallyapproaches50%edgedensityandthedetectionofthegiantcomponent correspondstothetheoreticalpredictionlogn/n. Bottomright: Whiskerplotof
2144planarand4600non-planargraphswithsignificantlydifferentcomplexity values (for both BDM and compression algorithms).
16
therefore successfully captured, as seen in Fig 4 (top right). One can design a measure[45]todetectthegiantcomponenttransition, evenanentropicone, by taking as random variable the number of connected links or an equivalent description, but algorithmic complexity does it without changing either the focus of the measure or the description of the object, because it is a robust measure invariant to different object descriptions [45]. The giant component transition isonlyapropertytoillustratethepowerofalgorithmicinformationtheory,and Fig. 4 (top right) shows that there are numerical approaches that conform to theoretical expectations. Thereareotherpropertiesofgraphsrelatedtographembeddings,havingto dowithwhethertheedgesofagraphdonotcrosseachotheronaplane. Hence in a topological sense it is simpler when the graphs are drawn in a single plane. Interestingly, both BDM and lossless compression consistently assigned lower Kolmogorovcomplexitytoplanargraphs,asshowninFig.4(bottomright). The
6744graphsusedandclassifiedasplanarandnon-planargraphsweretakenfrom the repository function GraphData[] available in the WolframMathematica software v.10. In [40], it was also shown that graphs follow the approximations by BDM and lossless compression to the Kolmogorov complexity of their dual graphs, which is as theoretically expected, given that there is an algorithm of fixed size for producing a dual from a graph.
8 The Kolmogorov complexity of complex networks We are now equipped to calculate the Kolmogorov complexity of a complex network. We have already theoretically calculated and experimentally approximated the Kolmogorov complexity of trivial/simple (denoted here by S) and random Erd¨os-R´enyi (ER) graphs. Regular graphs, such as completely disconnected or complete graphs, have Kolmogorov complexity K(S) = log|V(S)|. ER graphs have maximal complexity, so any other complex network is upper bounded by K(ER) graphs. Now the Kolmogorov complexity of a Barab´asiAlbert (BA) network is low, because it is based on a recursive procedure, but there is an element of randomness accounted for by the attachment probability. If BA is a BA network, then K(BA) ∼ γ +O(|V(BA)|), where γ is the size of the computer program or Turing machine implementing the preferential attachment algorithm and O(|V(BA)|) accounts for the attachment probability. However, if WS is a Watts-Strogatz network and p is the edge rewiring probability, if p → 1, then K(WS) → K(ER) and if p → 0, then K(WS) → K(G). We therefore have the following relationships between the most studied graph types and complex networks: K(S)<K(BA)<K(ER) K(WS)<K(BA) if p∼(cid:15) K(WS)=K(S) if p=0
17
K(WS)=K(S) if p=1 K(WS)>K(BA) if p∼1−(cid:15) with (cid:15) a typical small rewiring probability < 0.1. In Table 2, theoretical Kolmogorovcomplexityvaluesandtheirnumericalapproximationsaresummarized and numerical estimations only are illustrated in Fig. 5 and Fig. 4. Figure 5: Numerical approximations to different network topologies of increasingsize, withBDMfollowingthetheoreticalcalculations. ForWS,therewiring probability p = |V(WS)|/2000, showing how it moves from complexity values closetothesimple(complete)growinggraphtotherandomER.ERgraphsupperboundthecomplexityofallothers,whileBAgraphsgrowslowlybyafactor of log|E(BA)|, and the complete graph c is an example of a simple graph (any regular graph) with minimal complexity growing by log|V(c)|. Lossless compressionfailstokeepregulargraphsconvergingtolowcomplexityasnumerically calculated with both Compress and BZip2. WhileK(ER)growsbythenumberofedges
(cid:0)|V(ER)|(cid:1) givenbyp×n(n−1)/2
2 asafunctionofedgedensityp,K(ER)reachesitsmaximumatp=.5andthen comes back to low K values when approximating the complete graph, because from p=.25 on one can start describing the network by the number of missing links rather than the existing ones. Hence the curve for K(ER) is concave, with maximum
(cid:0)|V(ER)|(cid:1)
/2 (half the possible links) and minimum K(ER) =
2 log|V(ER)| for p = 0 and p = 1. A function approximating the behavior of ER graphs that provide an upper bound of K for any graph, as given in
18
Table 2: Theoretical calculations of K for different network topologies for 0 ≤ p≤1. ClearlymaximumK isreachedforrandomERgraphswithedgedensity p=.25 for which K(ER)=
(cid:0)|V(ER)|(cid:1)
/2.
2 Graph/network Notation K Regular S K(S)=O(log|V(S)|) Barab´asi-Albert BA K(BA)=O(|V(BA)|)+c Watts-Strogatz WS lim K(WS)∼K(S) p→0 lim K(WS)∼K(ER) p→1 Random Erd¨os-R´enyi ER K(ER)=O( n(n−1) )
16p|p−1| Table2,canbecalculatedbyinterpolatingapolynomialofdegreetwoforthese maximums and minimums for the two p points which give the quadratic curve K(ER) = O( n(n−1) ) as theoretical approximation to K(ER). This would be
16p|p−1| inagreementwiththenumericalbehaviorshowninFigs.5and4,exceptforthe connectivity phase transition of the emergence of the giant component, which causes the concave curve to be negatively skewed with a leading tail due to the low growth of K for a mostly disconnected graph before the emergence of the giant component, as the fitted curve in Fig. 4 shows.
8.1 Error estimation of finite approximations One important question concerns the error estimation of approximations to the Kolmogorov complexity of a network using both available methods—lossless compression and algorithmic probability. Given that we know the Kolmogorov complexityofextremegraphs(e.g. acompletegraphvs. anErd¨os-R´enyigraph), Figs. 6 show that the two methods have complementary capabilities when applied to the adjacency matrices or degree sequences of the graphs. The Kolmogorov complexity of a minimally complex graph (e.g. a complete or empty graph) grows by K(G) = log|V(G)| because there is no need for a descriptionofthepositionofanyedge(for,e.g. |E(G)|=
(cid:0)n(cid:1) or|E(G)|=0)and
2 therefore K(G) only grows by the logarithm of the number of vertices |V(G)|, while an upper bound of the Kolmogorov complexity of an ER random graph with edge density 0.5 is K(G) = |E(G)|, because one has to specify the end points of every edge. Fig. 6 shows classical and algorithmic complexity approximations of ER random graphs and complete graphs as calculated by three measures: BDM, losslesscompression(Compress)andEntropy(asappliedbothtotheadjacency matrix and to the degree sequences). OntheonehandBDMandCompressestimateK(G)fromabove,converging to a value K(G)/|E(G)| ∼ 1 for ER random graphs and K(G)/log|V(G)| ∼
0 for complete graphs (with BDM converging faster even if it is less stable due to the block size, and for which the error is therefore estimated, allowing correction).
19
On the other hand, Entropy as applied to adjacency matrices and degree sequences is similar, and conforms to the expected theoretical values. Entropy decreases for random graphs because ER graphs have the same average node degree, and the frequency of non-zero values in their adjacency matrices is 0.5 from the graph density. For complete graphs (with self-loops, hence adjacency matrices with all entries1)andwiththesameV(G)edgespernode,Entropyisclearly1forgrowing adjacency matrix as well as degree sequences. However, it can be seen that degree entropy and adjacency matrix entropy do not always coincide for random graphs, because of the small variance in node degree, while the adjacency matrix retains the exact edge density 0.5. Unlike theoretical values of Kolmogorov complexity, Entropy is therefore less robust as a measure of the complexity of information content, and while it has the advantage of being computable, its chief advantage is that it is not as powerful as Kolmogorov complexity [45]. Figure 6: Numerical approximations (normalized between 0 and 1) for analytically solvable extreme cases: ER random (edge density 0.5) and complete graphs. EntropyvaluesareexactcalculationsbutBDMandCompressareupper bounds of K(G).
8.2 Linear versus algorithmic complexity Based in the ideas of linear complexity described in Section 2, we calculated the matrix rank (the number of linearly independent rows) of a set of regular
20
graphs with different algorithmic complexity (as calculated by BDM) to find the expected correlation as shown in Fig. 7. Figure 7: Log-log correlation plot from almost 3000 graphs from the GraphData[] repository in Wolfram Mathematica v.10 (including graphs) with node count between 20 and 200. confirming the expectation of correlation between numerical approximations to algorithmic complexity and the rank of adjacency matrices of regular graphs with different low algorithmic information content. Thelinearfittingline(inred)is37.78+18.7xandthePearsoncorrelationis0.39 with p-value 2.8×10−108. When normalizing by graph size (node count), the correlation is still strong with a fitting line 1.44+19.15x, Pearson correlation
0.185 and p-value 6.51×10−24.
9 Algorithmic complexity of synthetic data and artificial networks Taking advantage of the robustness of Kolmogorov complexity as asymptotic invariant to different descriptions of an object (e.g. a network versus the data fromwhichthenetworkisconstructede.g. geneexpression), wecanattemptto findifthereisanumericalcorrespondenceofthecomplexityvaluesofequivalent objects. The Mendes dataset [26] is a common and widely used set of artificial gene networks for the objective comparison of network reconstruction analyses. In the database there are files emulating microarrays of gene expression data from interactions determined by particular topological and kinetic properties. These networks are embodied in kinetic models designed to produce synthetic gene expression data used for in silico experiments.
21
The networks consist of three sets of 100 genes, with eachsethaving 200interactions. TheyareclassifiedasErd¨os-R´enyirandomnetworks(ER),scale-free networks (SF), as defined by Barab´asi-Albert’s preferential attachment algorithm, and small world or Watts-Strogatz networks (WS), depending on which ofthethreetopologieswasemployedtogeneratethedataandthenetworks. The MendesmodelsuseamultiplicativeHillkineticstoapproximatetranscriptional interactions determined by the following differential equation: dx i =a (cid:89) NI 1K j nj (cid:89) NA (1+ Am l l )−b x dt i 1Knj +Inj AKml +Aml i i j=1 j j l=1 l l where x is the concentration (expression) of the i-th gene, N and N are the i I A number of upstream inhibitors and activators respectively, and their concentrations are I and A . All other parameters are specified and explained in [26]. j I There is one differential equation for each gene in the network following the behavior of Hill kinetics. The data files in the Mendes database are produced by the Hill Kinetics differential equations for which the networks were designed. Hence a correspondence between the complexity of gene expression data in the files and the networks may be expected. Fig. 8 shows how compressibility and BDM can be appliedtotheseobjects,namely,datasetscontainingsimulatedgeneexpression
(realvalues)data,andhowapplyingcompressibilityclassifiesdataandnetworks in agreement with each other. The expectation would be to see a natural correspondence between the time series’ complexity and the networks’ complexity. However, the range of application of BDM currently covers only discrete data, and Fig. 8 shows that it reverses the ER and the BA networks for this Mendes dataset. This effect can be the result of the ratio of data to noise introduced in the input files for the reconstruction methods in connection to the particular topology of a network, noise which is not present in the gold standard network. Another direction for future research is the extension of BDM to continuous data(bye.g. studyingtheeffectsofdatadiscretization,suchasbinning),which wouldthenallowustocomparethecomplexityofthesimulatedgeneexpression that generates the networks. Theapproachwouldsuggestthatinthetaskofnetworkreverseengineering, where only the gene expression data is known, the complexity of the data may provide a hint which may be useful in recovering/reconstructing the topology of the causal network if it cannot even substitute the need of explicit network inference to understand how the components of a complex system like a living cell interact and regulate each other and how elements influence each other.
10 Conclusions We have surveyed and introduced several concepts and methods at the intersection of network biology, graph theory, complex networks and information theory. We have applied and compared techniques, from Shannon’s entropy to
22
Figure 8: Top: Comparison of histograms of compressibility of the simulated gene expression data files and their underlying networks. The data sets and networks were produced by a Hills equation process. Here we show that compression directly on the data and the networks characterizes their topology. Bottom: BDM, however, classifies ER random networks as less complex than scale free networks, which in principle should not be the case, but the range of applicationofBDMdoesnotcovercontinuousdata,asproducedintheartificial gene expression data files from the Mendes database.
23
Kolmogorov complexity (by way of algorithmic probability and lossless compressibility), that can be used to analyze various aspects and properties of biological networks, techniques serviceable at different scales and for different purposes. Wehaveaimedforanencompassinginformation-theoreticstudyofbiological networks at different scales and for a potentially fruitful interaction between algorithmic information theory and systems biology. Wehaveintroducedtheoreticalandnumericalresultstobefurtherexplored and exploited. We have applied the methods to various networks, and in particulartoartificialgeneexpressiondatafilesandtheirassociatednetworkswith different topologies. The process of data discretization of continuous sources is a topic unto itself. Traditionally, it has been done by binning methods or density estimations. A survey of these techniques is offered in [18]. But in the application of information-theoretic measures to sequences of discretized real valued data, it is important to set values to the same digit precision. In the Mendes database, for example, discretization is achieved by simply truncating the values of the evaluations of the Hill equations. Other important matters to investigate further are the limitations of the measurement process and the sources of noise. Noise is part and parcel of naturally occurring processes, arising either from the measurements themselves or from interactions with other systems. Noise is usually expected to be random (but can be recursive or non-recursive), and it would look random for information-theoretic measures, as it would be alien to the mechanism generating the process of interest that’s being measured. However, the nature of this randomness can be an interlaced recursive signal or a disconnected one, and it willultimatelyhaveanimpactontheapproximationsofcomplexity. Differences in the complexity of different descriptions, as coming, e.g., from the simulated gene expression files in the Mendes network vs. the generated networks themselves, can therefore be due to these factors. For example, truncation for discretization of a continuous process can be both a source of apparent noise or a fundamentallossofimportantinformation. Intheformercase,theKolmogorov complexity of one system relative to the other would increase, and in the latter case it would decrease, thereby in principle empowering the quantification of these phenomena. References
[1] L. Babai, E. Luks, Canonical labeling of graphs, Proc. 15th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 171–183, 1983.
[2] R. Albert and A.-L. Barab´asi, Statistical mechanics of complex networks, Reviews of Modern Physics, 74, 47, 2002.
[3] U. Alon, Network Motifs: theory and experimental approaches, Nature,
450, vol. 8, June 2007.
24
[4] U. Alon, Collection of Complex Networks. Uri Alon Homepage 2007
(accessed on July 2013). http://www.weizmann.ac.il/mcb/UriAlon/ groupNetworksData.html.
[5] L.A. Boyer et al. Core transcriptional regulatory circuitry in human embryonic stem cells, Cell 122, 947–956, 2005.
[6] H. Buhrman , M. Li , J. Tromp , P. Vit´anyi, Kolmogorov Random Graphs and the Incompressibility Method, SIAM J. Comput, 29(2):590–599, 1999.
[7] C.S. Calude, Information and Randomness: An Algorithmic Perspective, EATCS Series, 2nd. edition, 2010, Springer.
[8] G.J. Chaitin. On the length of programs for computing finite binary sequences Journal of the ACM, 13(4):547–569, 1966.
[9] T.M. Cover and J.A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.
[10] M. Dehmer, N. Barbarini, K. Varmuza, A. Graber, A Large Scale Analysis of Information-Theoretic Network Complexity Measures Using Chemical Structures. PLoS ONE 4(12): e8057, 2009.
[11] J.-P. Delahaye and H. Zenil, Numerical Evaluation of the Complexity of ShortStrings: AGlanceIntotheInnermostStructureofAlgorithmicRandomness, Applied Mathematics and Computation 219, pp. 63–77, 2012.
[12] P. Erd¨os, A. R´enyi, On Random Graphs I. In Publ. Math. Debrecen 6, p.
290–297, 1959.
[13] P.Erd¨os,A.R´enyi,Ontheevolutionofrandomgraphs,Bull.Inst.Internat. Statist, 38 (4), 343–347, 1961.
[14] E.N.Gilbert,Randomgraphs,Annals of Mathematical Statistics 30: 1141–
1144, doi:10.1214/aoms/1177706098.
[15] N. Iranfar, D. Fuller and W.F. Loomis Transcriptional regulation of postaggregation genes in Dictyostelium by a feed-forward loop involving GBF and LagC. Dev. Biol. 290, 460–469, 2006.
[16] H. Jeong, B. Tombor, A.-L. Barab´asi, The large-scale organization of metabolic networks, Nature 407, 651, 2000.
[17] W.W. Kirchherr, M. Li, P.M.B. Vit´anyi, The miraculous universal distribution, Journal Mathematical Intelligencer, pp 7–15, 1997.
[18] Kotsiantis, S.; Kanellopoulos, D. Discretization Techniques: A recent survey, GESTS International Transactions on Computer Science and Engineering 32 (1): 4758, 2006.
25
[19] J.F. Knabe, Computational Genetic Regulatory Networks: Evolvable, Selforganizing Systems, Springer, 2013.
[20] A.N.Kolmogorov.Threeapproachestothequantitativedefinitionofinformation, Problems of Information and Transmission, 1(1):1–7, 1965.
[21] C.G. Langton, Studying artificial life with cellular automata, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 22 (1–3): 120–149, 1986.
[22] T.I.Lee,N.J.Rinaldi,F.Robert,D.T.Odom,Z.Bar-Joseph,G.K.Gerber, N.M. Hannett, C.T. Harbison, C.M. Thompson, I. Simon, J. Zeitlinger, Transcriptional regulatory networks in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Science,
298, 799–804, 2002.
[23] L.A. Levin. Laws of information conservation (non-growth) and aspects of the foundation of probability theory, Problems of Information Transmission, 10(3):206–210, 1974.
[24] M. Li and P. Vit´anyi, An Introduction to Kolmogorov Complexity and Its Applications, 3rd ed., Springer, 2009.
[25] S.Mangan,A.ZaslaverandU.Alon,Thecoherentfeedforwardloopserves as a sign-sensitive delay element in transcription networks. J. Mol. Biol.,
334, 197–204, 2003.
[26] P.Mendes,W.Sha,K.Ye,Artificialgenenetworksforobjectivecomparison of analysis algorithms, Bioinformatics, 19(Suppl 2):II122-II129, 2003.
[27] R.Milo,S.Shen-Orr,S.Itzkovitz,N.Kashtan,D.Chklovskii,andU.Alon. Network Motifs: Simple Building Blocks of Complex Networks, Science
298, no. 5594: 824-827, 2002.
[28] R.Milo.etal.Superfamiliesofdesignedandevolvednetworks.Science303,
1538–1542, 2004.
[29] D.L.Neel,M.E.Orrison,TheLinearComplexityofaGraph,TheElectronic Journal of Combinatorics, vol 13(R9), 2006.
[30] D.T. Odom et al. Control of pancreas and liver gene expression by HNF transcription factors, Science, 303, 1378–1381, 2004.
[31] F.Soler-Toscano,H.Zenil,J.-P.DelahayeandN.Gauvrit,Correspondence and Independence of Numerical Evaluations of Algorithmic Information Measures, Computability, vol. 2, no. 2, pp 125–140, 2013.
[32] A.M.Turing,(1936),OnComputableNumbers,withanApplicationtothe Entscheidungsproblem”.ProceedingsoftheLondonMathematicalSociety.
2 42: 230–265, 1937.
26
[33] S.S. Shen-Orr, R. Milo, S. Mangan and U. Alon, Network motifs in the transcriptional regulation network of Escherichia coli, Nature Genet. 31,
64–68, 2002.
[34] F. Soler-Toscano, H. Zenil, J.-P. Delahaye and N. Gauvrit, Calculating Kolmogorov Complexity from the Frequency Output Distributions of Small Turing Machines, PLoS ONE 9(5): e96223, 2014.
[35] L.A.Saddicetal.TheLEAFYtargetLMI1isameristemidentityregulator andactstogetherwithLEAFYtoregulateexpressionofCAULIFLOWER, Development 133, 1673–1682, 2006.
[36] R.J. Solomonoff, A formal theory of inductive inference: Parts 1 and 2. Information and Control, 7:1–22 and 224–254, 1964.
[37] G.Swiers,R.PatientandM.Loose,Geneticregulatorynetworksprogramming hematopoietic stem cells and erythroid lineage specification, Dev. Biol. 294, 525–540, 2006.
[38] D.J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz., Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks, Nature 393, 440-442, 1998.
[39] H. Zenil, “Network Motifs and Graphlets”, http://demonstrations. wolfram.com/NetworkMotifsAndGraphlets/ Wolfram Demonstrations Project, December 9, 2013.
[40] H.Zenil,F.Soler-Toscano,K.DingleandA.Louis,GraphAutomorphisms andTopologicalCharacterizationofComplexNetworksbyAlgorithmicInformation Content, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, vol. 404, pp. 341–358, 2014.
[41] H. Zenil, F. Soler-Toscano, J.-P. Delahaye and N. Gauvrit, TwoDimensional Kolmogorov Complexity and Validation of the Coding Theorem Method by Compressibility, 2013.
[42] H.Zenil,N.A.KianiandJ.Tegn´er,Algorithmiccomplexityofmotifs,clusters,superfamiliesofnetworks,ProceedingsoftheIEEEInternationalConference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine, Shanghai, China, 2013.
[43] H. Zenil and J.A.R. Marshall, Some Aspects of Computation Essential to Evolution and Life, Ubiquity (ACM), vol. 2013, no. April (2013), pp 1–16.
[44] H.Zenil,C.Gershenson,J.A.R.MarshallandD.Rosenblueth,LifeasThermodynamic Evidence of Algorithmic Structure in Natural Environments, Entropy, 14(11), 2173–2191, 2012.
[45] H. Zenil, Small Data Matters, Correlation versus Causation and AlgorithmicDataAnalytics.InJ.Werneckeetal(eds.),Predictability in the world: philosophy and science in the complex world of Big Data, Springer Verlag
(forthcoming)
27
[46] H. Zenil, N.A. Kiani, J. Tegn´er, Quantifying Loss of Information in Network-based Dimensionality Reduction Techniques, Journal of Complex Networks, DOI: 10.1093/comnet/cnv025.
28