8102 naJ
62
]YC.sc[
2v31510.6071:viXra Beyond Volume: The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on the Machine Learning Pipeline
1 1 1 Keith Feldman Louis Faust Xian Wu
1 1 Chao Huang and Nitesh V. Chawla Universityof NotreDame, NotreDame, IN, USA
{kfeldman,lfaust,xwu9,chuang7,nchawla}@nd.edu Abstract. From medical charts to national census, healthcare has traditionally operated under a paper-based paradigm. However, the past decade has marked a long and arduous transformation bringing healthcareintothedigital age. Rangingfrom electronic healthrecords, todigitized imaging and laboratory reports, to public health datasets, today, healthcare now generates an incredible amount of digital information. Such a wealth of data presents an exciting opportunity for integrated machine learning solutions to address problems across multiple facets of healthcare practice and administration. Unfortunately, the ability to derive accurate and informative insights requires more than the ability to execute machine learning models. Rather, a deeper understanding of the data on which the models are run is imperative for their success. While a significant effort has been undertaken to develop models able to process the volume of data obtained during the analysis of millions of digitalized patient records, it is important to remember that volume representsonlyoneaspectofthedata.Infact,drawingondatafrom an increasingly diverse set of sources, healthcare data presents an incredibly complex set of attributes that must be accounted for throughout themachinelearningpipeline.Thischapterfocusesonhighlightingsuch challenges,andisbrokendownintothreedistinctcomponents,eachrepresenting a phase of the pipeline. We begin with attributes of the data accounted for during preprocessing, then move to considerations during model building, and end with challenges to the interpretation of model output. For each component, we present a discussion around data as it relates to the healthcare domain and offer insight into the challenges each may impose on theefficiency of machine learning techniques. Keywords: HealthcareInformatics,MachineLearning,KnowledgeDiscovery
1 Introduction Only in its infancy as a digital entity, the healthcare industry has undergone a significant transition over the past decade from a paper-based domain to one
2 Feldman et al. operating primarily through a digital medium. Beyond the logistical benefits of maintainingandorganizingpatients’medicalrecords,theabilitytoquicklyidentifyandprocessinformationfrommillionsofpatientrecords,laboratoryreports, imaging procedures, payment claims, and public health databases has brought the industry to the precipice of a significant change. Namely, the opportunity to utilize data science and machine learning methodologies to address problems across the practice and administration of healthcare. In fact, utilization of such analytic techniques has provided a foundation on which models of personalized and predictive care have emerged [1]. These modelsrepresentamyriadofopportunitiesfromimprovedpatientstratification, toidentifyingnoveldiseasecomorbiditiesanddruginteractions,totheprediction of clinical outcomes [2]. However, while such applications hold great promise for the healthcare industry, the application of machine learning methodologies faces a significant set of obstacles intrinsic to the data being evaluated and the population from which the data is drawn. Since its entrance into the digital era,the increasing scale and scope of data has placed great emphasis on the advent of Big Data in healthcare and the challengesthatcome withit. With anestimated150exabytesofdatagenerated by2011,earlyworkaddressedthechallengesofprocessingdataatsuchascale[3]. However,itisimportanttorememberthatBigDataisdefinedbymorethanjust size,but rather by whatareknownas the four V’s (The Volume, orquantity of dataavailable.TheVelocity,orspeedatwhichthedataiscreated.TheVariety of the data elements available. And the Veracity, or inherent truthfulness of dataitself)[4].Withadvancementstothetheoreticalunderpinningandpractical implementationsofmachinelearningalgorithmsprovidingtheabilitytoconsume andanalyzeeventhe largestclinicalandbiomedicaldatasets,the challengenow falls not to the size of the data, but its complexity. Instarkcontrasttotheidealisticdataonwhichmachinelearningalgorithms are theoried, healthcare data is inherently fragmented, noisy, high-dimensional, and heterogeneous. With the influx of data from an increasingly varied set of sources, it has become clear that effective utilization of these techniques will require more than accessibility of data or ability to execute Big Data analytics. As clinical research becomes increasingly intertwined with the statistical methodologiesof datascience,effective applicationsrequire anawarenessto the mechanisms by which the data is created, processed, and analyzed. To this end, the following chapter will address the complexities of healthcaredata asthey impactthe machinelearningalgorithmswhichconsumethem. Broadly, we break such work into three major categories, each representing a componentofthemachinelearningpipeline,asseeninFigure1.Beginningwith preprocessing, we will discuss attributes of the data itself through the concepts ofnoise,missingness,andvariabilityinlanguage.Wewillthenmovetothemodeling phase, discussing considerations such as the heterogeneity of data sources, sparsity and class imbalance. Finally, we will look to the model output, discussing the concepts of validation and verification. We will conclude with some general recommendations and a review of the open problems.
The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 3 ICD-10-PCS MC-01-DCI ICD9-CM DEMONS SCPCH OPCS MSD IHCI Preprocessing Modeling Evaluation Missing Data Heterogeneity Validation & Verification Data Noise
1 0 0 0 0 1 0
0 0 1 0 1 0 0
0 1 0 1 0 0 0 CPT Sparsity and Imbalance ICD Variability in Standards Fig.1. Fundamental challenges to the machine learning pipeline resulting from the complexity of healthcare data
4 Feldman et al.
2 Glossary and Key Terms Preprocessing:Aprocessintendedtoaddressthenoisy,missing,andinconsistent propertiesofreal-worlddata,improvingdata qualitypriorto modeling.Preprocessingisoftenthefirststepinthemachinelearningpipelineandischaracterized by techniques such as cleaning, integration, reduction, and transformation [5]. Modeling: The second stage of the machine learning pipeline, modeling focuses on the construction of statistical, probabilistic models intended to learn representationsofthe vastamounts ofdata collected.Suchmodels areusedto detect patterns in data and potentially use the patterns to predict future data [6]. Evaluation: Performed on the artifacts produced by modeling, evaluation forms the final stage of the pipeline, establishing the model’s predictive efficacy, complexity, technical correctness, and ease with which it can be understood [7]. Validation: The process of evaluating a model in its ability to accurately represent the observed system [8]. Verification: The process of evaluating whether data manipulation and model construction were accomplished with technical correctness [8]. Medical Coding: The systematic classification of data into alphanumeric codes fortheidentificationofdiagnoses,procedures,medications,laboratorytests,and other clinical attributes [9]. Sparsity:Occurswhenonlyasmallpercentage(typically<1%)ofattributesfor an instance are non-zero [10]. Concept Drift: The notion that inputs or outcomes related to a model may change overtime in unexpected manners reducing the accuracy of models as the data streams change [11].
3 Preprocessing Just as clinicians require quick and accurate information to provide care at the highest level, the need to collect and produce high quality data has become paramount for applications of machine learning as they continue to integrate intoaspectsofcarepertainingtohealthandhumanbehavior.However,whilethe goalis clear,the rapidinflux ofnew data,and the evolvingnature ofhealthcare itself offers a significant set of challenges. In this regard, the following sections present an overview to the considerations of preprocessing data collected across the healthcare domain.
3.1 Manifestation in Healthcare Whilethechallengestopreprocessingarepresentinmanydomains,thedynamics of healthcare necessitate that care be taken to address a number of biological, computational, and representational aspects of data. These can range from the
The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 5 filtration of noise, to the need to navigate a multitude of coding standards. The following sections will begin by highlighting scenarios from which these challenges arise. Noise The presence of incorrect or irrelevant data, otherwise known as noise, representsafundamentalcomponentofworkingwithanyreal-worlddata.Healthcareisnoexception,andarisingfromanimperfectdatacollectionprocess,commonoccurrencesofnoisecanincludemissingvalues,misspellings,abbreviations, misfieldedvalues,wordtranspositions,andduplicatedorconflictingrecords[12]. The presenceofnoisestemsfrommorethanjustdataqualityissues,itmayalso arise from the natural variation among individuals. Given a population of instances, a small sample may appear inconsistent with the rest i.e. “outliers”. Next,itisimportanttorememberthatnoiseispresentnotonlyintherecording ofdata,but in its measurementas well.Healthcare is currently entering unchartedterritory.While traditionallythegenerationofhealthdatawasconfined withinthewallsofaclinicalsetting,advancingtechnologyhasallowedforcollection from a variety of sources. These range in complexity from personal health tools, to clinically focused devices, to total wireless sensor networks, to home monitoringsystems[13–15].However,with developmentfromanumberofmanufacturers, utilizing a range of algorithmic techniques for their data collection andapproximation,thequalityofthisdatahasbeendrawnintoquestion[16,17]. A scenario highlighted by Bland and Altman, who note that “several measurements ofthe samequantity onthe samesubjectwillnotingeneralbe the same. This may be because of natural variation in the subject, variation in the measurement process, or both” [18]. Finally, we find that beyond the collection and recording of health data, there exists a more complex source of noise known as artifacts. Artifacts result not from data collection or variability in subjects, but from the physiological processeswhichgeneratethe dataitself, manifesting as whatappearsto be normal data. Although, in reality, such feature values are not generated by the intended source (e.g. electrical signals from the brain collected by an electroencephalogram). Instead, this data is generated by alternative biological mechanisms including cardiac, glossokinetic, muscle, eye movements, respiratory and pulse variations [19]. Missingness Theoccurrenceofmissingdataisanalmostunavoidableproblem for any domain, including healthcare [20]. Missing data can result from a number of processes, ranging from fundamental attributes of data collection to the inherent ambiguity and variability of an individual’s health condition. At the most basic level, as with all studies that involve the collection of information from individuals, there exists the possibility of missing data attributes due to a subjectsfailuretorespondcompletely,aswellastheinabilitytoassessallpossibleclinicalandsocialattributesastheypertaintoeachindividual.Additionally, missingdataisnotrestrictedtoparticularattributes,butcanariseonabroader scale with attrition of an entire instance during longitudinal data collection. In
6 Feldman et al. addition to the to the lack of data, such a scenario presents difficultly during processing as the reason for dropping may be linked to attributes of the study design, a trend which may go unnoticed without closer investigation [21]. The evolvingdigitalnatureofhealthcarepresentsitsownsetofchallengesinregards tothepresenceofmissingdata.Fromacollectionstandpoint,monitoringdevices mayfailor become disconnected,data maybecome corrupt,or compatibilityissues may result in the inability to collect data, resulting in large gaps of the recorded data [22]. Moreover, even in the scenario in which data collection occurs as expected, missingesscantakeotherforms.Lookingtothe frequencyofclinicalencounters, it may occur from a temporal standpoint. With the exception of some critical care,patients are rarelyunder continuous observation,instead, many may meet with their physicians as infrequently as twice a year. These gaps in observation and records may allow for fluctuations in health to go undocumented, leaving only brief snapshots of the patients condition. Further, missingness can occur due to the fragmented nature of the entities collecting the data. Healthcare data comes not only from hospitals and primary care centers, but a variety of sources, be that specialists visited, community programs, or even physical trackers [14,23]. However, despite the various data sources collecting data relevant to the overall profile of an individuals health, data integration and sharing considerations often provide only a small portion of data to any one source. Finally, it is important to note a distinction between missing data and negative values as it relates to a perhaps non-traditional concept of missingness. Unlikedomainssuchasretail,wherethe purchaseofanitemcanbe represented in a binary fashion (purchased or not), the lack of affirmation for a particular entityinhealthcaredatadoesnotnecessitateanegativecase.Lookingtodisease diagnoses, a patient may in fact have a particular condition, for which they are never formally diagnosed, or for which the diagnosis code is not recorded, as is the case with often under-reported diagnoses such as obesity [24]. Variability in Language Another challenge in processing healthcare data stems not from a function of its quality, but from its representation. In an effort to quantify and standardize the vast set of possible conditions, procedures, and clinical elements, a myriad of medical coding schemes have been developed,including the InternationalClassificationof Diseases(ICD), SystematizedNomenclature of Medicine (SNOMED), CurrentProceduralTerminology
(CPT), Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS), LOINC, Europe’s Classification of Surgical Operations and Procedures (OPCS), and the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) to name a few. In fact, as the number of standards continues to increase there is a considerable amount of overlap between them. As a result, effective processing of such data must take care to consider the possibility where the same attribute may be represented in multiple ways. This situation is exacerbated by the nature of
The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 7 healthcaresystems,whereinresponsetodocumentationorreportingstandards, multiple coding standards may be used even within the same institution. Not only does variability arise from the use of different coding standards, but from emerging diversity as these standards are revised and updated. As an example,the ICD’s latestrevision(ICD-10)broughtwith it roughly55,000new diagnostic codes and over 68,000 new procedural codes [25]. Although this increased feature space allows for representation of conditions at a much greater specificity, coalescing codes across revisions during processing presents a significant challenge. Further, although mappings have been created to assist in the transitionbetweencodes,theyarenotuniveralandoftenincomplete.TheWorkgroupforElectronicData Exchangesuggest“healthcareorganizationsuse these mappings as starting points to develop their own, more precise data crosswalk applications between ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes” [26]. While variability is clearly a product of the expansive set of coding standardsandtheirrevisions,italsoresultsfromthemethodologyofmedicalcoding itself. Medical coding is a subjective process, the accuracy of which has been shown to be dependent on the clinical record of the condition observed, as well as the interpretation of the diagnostic codes themselves [27]. While it may be straightforward for simple cases where a patient is assigned a single diagnosis, inconsistencies from coders and institutions have been found to increase with the complexity of a patient’s condition, specifically when they receive multiple diagnoses [28].
3.2 Implications to Machine Learning Noted by Cortes et. al, “insufficiencies of the data limit the performance of any learning machine or other statistical tool constructed from and applied to the data collection - no matter how complex the machine or how much data is used totrainit”[29].Asaresult,itisimperativetounderstandnotonlytheprocesses fromwhichpreprocessingchallengesarisewithinthehealthcaredomain,butalso the implications to the preprocessing phase of the machine learning pipeline. A discussion to each consideration can be found in the sections below. Noise As applicationsofmachinelearningcontinueto expandintonewaspects of healthcare, the processing of noisy data has become a central component of many works. From a theoretical perspective, prior work has established fundamentals of what defines learning, and concepts of model consistency. Together, these constructs help illustrate how failure to process noise in data can cause difficulties in constructing a model that accurately reflects the population from whichthedataisdrawn,negativelyimpactinggeneralizableperformance[30–32]. While muchofthe standardnoisecanbe attributedto dataqualityissues,it is important to highlight the need for data understanding in the preprocessing step. In particular,with relationto outliers. There are over100 different discordancy/outlier tests whose use can depend on factors such as data distribution, whether distribution parameters are known, and even the number and type of
8 Feldman et al. the expected outliers [33]. As such, preprocessing noisy data presents a significant challenge, as incorrectly applying data cleaning techniques can result in large variations in the finalized dataset. Looking to other sources of noise, the nature of potential physiological artifactsrequiresadditionalconsiderationsduringdatapreprocessing.The presence of an artifact does not necessitate the value be incorrect, though similarly to outliers, failure to remove such data has far reaching implications as such data presents “a milder form of training data error that can cause reduced accuracy” [34]. However,unlike outliers, these artifacts are often difficult to broadly and statistically discern from true signals without clinical insight. Finally, in addition to the data quality concerns already discussed, noise resulting from the variability of the systems which collect data presents a distinct concern during processing. Due to the resulting intra-instance variability, there exists the case in which two instances with identical feature values present two different classes or outcomes. Whereas such instances are often removed,within healthcare, such a scenario is quite common and may represent a legitimate aspect of variability with a patient’s health. This in turn, introduces a considerable amount of uncertainly into the system, representing an inherent problem to separability. Missingness Just as the numerous sources of noise present a challenge to the effective processing ofhealthcaredata,so too do the manyforms in which missing data canmanifest acrossthe domain. At anattribute-level, data is typically classified as missing in one of three forms: completely at random (MCAR), at random (MAR), and not at random (MNAR). Although all forms of missingess present a concern, the various forms of missingness can present significantly different considerations during the processing of a dataset. While data missing completelyatrandom(MCAR)presentsminimalconcerntothe underlyingdistribution,allowingfordatatobedroppedorimputedwithoutworryofintroducingadditionalbiases,suchascenarioisoftenunrealistic.Rather,dataistypically missing due to an underlying, sometimes unobserved,pattern known as missing at random (MAR) or missing not at random (MNAR), each of which may requiretechniques suchasmaximumlikelihoodestimationormultiple imputation to help address the inherent bias they present to the data collected [35–37]. In comparison,bothmethodstendtoyieldsimilarresultswhenimplementedinthe same way, however, performance gains in efficiency and reduced bias regarding these methods relateto the inclusionofauxiliaryvariables[38].The inclusionof data to these methods, even that which is irrelevant to the objective at hand, suggests the amount of data included in these methods is of equal importance to the methods themselves. Beyond the type of missingness, the quantity of missing information further influences the preproccessing of data. With respect to the occurrences of large temporalgaps,wefindthatalthoughmathematicallywemaybeabletoimpute, model and predict estimations of missing values during processing there is no guarantee the values computed accurately reflect the true condition of the in-
The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 9 dividual during that time period. This consideration is particularly relevant in light of the common scenario where data is collected during a subjects clinical encounters, each of which may occur months apart. Finally, building on the concerns of temporal missingess, commonly associated with longitudinal studies, missingness by attrition, presents a number of additional considerations to effective preprocessing of data. Work by Graham suggests attrition-related missingness focuses on the program (or treatment) P, the dependent Y, and the interaction between these two: PY [39]. Just as the MCAR/MAR/MNAR nomenclature providesa roadmapto the appropriate preprocessingtechniques, identifying and assessingwhich of the possible combinations of these three factors causes missingess to arise presents a critical step in improving the ability to address bias during the processing of such data. Variability in Language The variability brought on by the breath of coding standards presents a fundamental obstacle in the effective preprocessing of healthcare data. Although an underlying condition may be the same across two distinctrepresentations,withthemultitude ofvaluesacrosseachofthedifferent codingstandards,ithasbecomenearlyimpossibletoaccuratelycreateacomprehensive mapping to translate between each standard. However, such a mapping is critical for unifying disparate data sources during the processing stage of the machine learning pipeline. Further, although data may stay consistent with respect to a single coding standard, temporal changes in how these codes are assigned can still occur as a result of changing regulations, or even revisions within the standard [40]. Presentingsimilarobstaclesaswithmultiple codingstandards,thesechanges,more formally defined by the notion of concept drift, cause models built on old data to become inconsistent with new data as the models inputs and target variable change over time [11]. While such a shift is extremely difficult to identify, it is critically important, as such discrepancies make it not only difficult to understand values, but have the potential to add ambiguity during its processing [41]. In particular,changes in the code frequencies, which are often used during preprocessing and data exploration, may be attributed to other clinical attributes, rather than the true shift in language. For example, an individual with a chronic illness may have a record with multiple representations due to changes in how the illness was labeled over time. When such changes go unaccounted for, the record may be perceived as having three distinct illnesses instead of one.
4 Modeling To this point we have discussed intrinsic characteristics of data, those properties which influence the statisticalfoundations guiding machine learning theory. However,wenowlookfurther,nottothepropertiesofthedata,buttothemechanisms through which the data is consumed and represented to build effective
10 Feldman et al. machine learning models. Such attributes range from high-level aspects of integrating heterogenous data types, to low-level considerations when representing an increasingly expansive feature space.
4.1 Manifestation in Healthcare As before, we will begin with an outline of the processes within the healthcare domainfrom which suchconsiderationsarise.An overviewof eachcan be found in the respective sections to follow. Heterogeneity Drawnfrommultiplesourcesandencompassingmultiplemodalities, healthcare data represents a remarkably heterogeneous set of data types and sources. Perhaps the most prominent examples can be found within the wealth of clinical data now digitalized as a result of EMR integration across healthcare practices. Typically,such data is brokeninto structured data including diagnosis codes, procedural information, medication data, laboratory test results, data recorded directly from patient’s bedside monitors, and unstructured data such as images and clinical text [42]. However,data can also include patient demographics, financial claims, and more recently, genomic sequencing andotheromicsdata,eachofwhichmayrequiredifferentconsiderationsasthey are processed during modeling. Althoughelectronichealthrecordsareperhapsthemostwell-knownsourceof data,health-relateddatacanbecollected,inferred,andanalyzedfromanumber of indirect sources. These can include common population health and reporting fieldssuchasthecensusbureauandthedepartmentoflaborstatistics,aswellas less obvioussourcessuch as the locationof freshfood sourcesin a city. It is also worthnotingthenumberofexternaldataisonlyexpectedtoincrease,asshiftsin theregulatorylandscapeofthehealthcareindustryhaveadvancedthecollection and analysis of population health data though a number of initiatives [43]. Finally,itis importantto notethatheterogeneitycanexistevenwithindata of the same type. As an example, through prior work our group has established fundamental differences between clinical notes based on the clinical occupation ofthosewhowritethem[44].Whileimportantfortheprocessingofclinicaltext, theestablishmentofsuchheterogeneityimpressesadeeperneedforanawareness of not only the types of data we process, but the varied sources of data from which models are constructed. Dimensionality, Sparsity and Imbalance Beyond the variety of sources generating data, the digitalization of healthcare data has resulted in a significant increase in the number of features able to be extracted with respect to an instance, i.e. its dimentionality. Although the high-dimensional data resulting from the processing of unstructured images and text has become commonplace, advancements in clinical and computational technology now allow for improved analysis of biological processes at their most basic level. As an example, resultingfromthe increasingaffordabilityofgenomicsequencing,wehavewitnesseda
The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 11 rise of genome-wide associationstudies, which aim to represent and identify associationsbetweentheover10millioncommonsingle-nucleotidepolymorphisms
(SNPs) in the human genome [45]. However,suchexpansivefeaturesetsarenotonlyaresultofbiologicalmechanisms, but of artificial constructs used to structure the data itself. In particular, we look to the coding standards used to represent attributes of a patient’s condition and care. As noted prior, there exist a multitude of standards, each potentially representing tens of thousands of unique codes. In fact, it is the expansiveness of the resulting feature space that leads us to the next aspect of healthcare data that has been shown to impact modeling: sparsity.Althoughwemaybeabletocapture,code,andquantifyanincreasingly largefeatureset,onlyasmallsubsetoffeaturesareoftenrecordedorrelevantfor aparticularindividual.Suchapointcanbebestillustratedwiththeunderstanding thatitis highly improbablea patientwillrecordmorethanafractionofthe over 100,000 diagnoses and procedures that can now be discretely represented through the ICD-10 standard [25]. Finally, taking the considerations of dimensionality and sparsity to the next logical step, we find the concept of imbalance. Building on the notion that for anysingleinstance,thedatacapturedlikelyrepresentsonlyasparsesetofvalues withrespecttothepossiblesetofdataelements,wemustacknowledgethatthese samefeaturesareoftenusedasthe responsevariableformanymachinelearning applications. Whether the prediction of a future diagnosis, or the readmission probability of patient, effective utilization of data in which only a minority of individuals presentthe attribute ofinterestoftenrequiresadditionalprocessing, or specialized models.
4.2 Implications to Machine Learning Havingillustratedanumberofprocessesfromwhichdatachallengesarisewithin the healthcare domain, we again address how these challenges, at the modeling stage, impact machine learning algorithms. Heterogeneity From a technical perspective, one of the primary considerations in the application of machine learning methodologies to the increasingly heterogeneous healthcare data space comes with the acknowledgment that the data captured across each source may span a range of data types. Such data canrepresentcategorical/discrete(laboratorySRI values),ordinal(painscales), or continuous (medication dosages) values. However, as noted by Lewis et al.,
“traditionalstatisticalmethodsthatassumeGaussiandistributions,orengineering methods that assume vector or matrix input do not obviously generalize to datasets comprisedof variable-lengthstrings,vectors of realnumbers, trees and networks” [46]. Further,theheterogeneityofthedatasourcesthemselvespresentachallenge for learning algorithms. As the extent of available healthcare data continues to increase,wemustalsoconsidertheimplicationsofintegratingdisparatesources.
12 Feldman et al. There, of course, exist the practical concerns including record matching and differences in terminology andstandards between systems, where a patient may include their middle name on one form but not another or systems may record heightasmetersorfeet.However,themodelingofheterogeneousintegrateddata sources presents a number of unique concerns, including the ability to reconcile
“dirty” data such as incompatible test results, changes in coded data, and the need to ensure trust between systems that share sensitive data [47]. Finally, at its core, the siloed data sources present a deeper systemic issue. The lack of a unique identifier to track an individual throughout the various components of the healthcare system often present an incomplete view of any individual’s health data [48]. While the missing data itself can present concern, the impact of this fragmentation compounds during the integration of multiple data sources. Incorrectly associating records of one patient from two hospitals, recordsbetweenaprimaryandspecialist,ormultipleinstancesofthesamerecord has serious implications to the machine learning algorithms used to analyze the data. At a basic level, this provides duplicate data that can bias the underlying distributions.Whileatahigher-level,thisremovesatrueindependence assumption, potentially biasing performance measures by splitting what appears to be unique instances amongst the train and test sets during evaluation. Dimensionality, Sparsity and Imbalance With the considerable advancement of computing systems and hardwareover the past few decades, the ability tostore,represent,andmanipulatehigh-dimensionaldatahasbecomecommonplace. However, the appropriate utilization of such data in the machine learning pipeline warrants additional consideration. In particular, the scenario often knownasthecurseofdimensionality,inwhichthenumberoffeaturesapproaches or exceeds the number of instances, presents a considerable obstacle to fundamentalmachinelearningtheory.Oneofthemostdirectimpactsresultsfromthe emergence of spurious correlation, where many uncorrelated random variables mayhavehighsamplecorrelations[49].Whilemoreindirectlysuchascenariohas been shown to breakdown asymptotic theory, preventing the unique estimation of parameters due to occurrence of singular matrices [50]. Further, the sparsity of feature values presents an additional concern to the development of generalizable models. The identification of latent interactions between features is often not complete, as combinations between all features is rarely captured. While in theory, such an issue can be alleviated with the collection of a large dataset, as feature spaces become ever-larger,the collection of sufficient data is not often feasible due to logistical and economical considerations.While manynewermachinelearningtechniqueshavelookedtosparsityas afoundationfortechniquesthataddresstheincreasingdimensionalityusingvarious greedy algorithms, little theoretical support is currently available for such techniques [51]. Finally,as notedprior,the presence ofsparsityoften leads to the traditional class imbalance problem, where the attribute of interest is possessed by only a subset of instances. The implications of such imbalance on statistical learning-
The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 13 tasks have been well established in a number of prior works [52]. However it is worth noting a few examples of how the presence of imbalance can impact the modeling of data. From a logistical point of view, a few noisy instances can degrade the identification of the minority class, restricting it to fewer examples to train with. Whereas from a more theoretical presumptive the use of global performancemeasuresthat guide the learningprocessmayoptimize parameters and decision boundaries in favor of the majority class. Classification rules that predict the positive class are often highly specialized resulting in low coverage of instances acrossthe datasetand may be discardedin favorof providing more general rules [53].
5 Evaluation
“All models are wrong, some are useful” [54]. The provocative and now-famous quote by George Box eloquently provides a fundamental premise of machine learning. The understanding that models may not truly capture the complexity of a system, but rather provide an effective approximation of its observable attributes. This concept has since been defined more formally by Oreskes et al, stating “Model results may or may not be valid, depending on the quality and quantity of the input parameters and the accuracy of the auxiliary hypotheses”
[55].Inactuality,whatthesesentimentcaptureis the needtoconstructamodel insucha waythatitaccuratelyrepresentsthe system(validation)andaccounts for the technical correctness of the model itself (verification) [8].
5.1 Manifestation in Healthcare Together,validationandverificationrepresentacriticalaspectofcomputational toolssuchasmachinelearningsimpactonoursociety.However,accurateassessment of either measure proves a nontrivial task in its own right. Difficulties associated with validation and verification are grounded by two district ideas whichgovernbothmeasures.First,thatthereexistsa groundtruth,andsecond that any ground truth provided is correct. While both of these assumptions are difficult to guarantee for any real-world data, they are particularly relevant to the variability of data across the healthcare domain. The first concern represents a variant of the partially labeled data problem, formally defined by Szummer [56]. As noted in the Preprocessing section, although missing values are commonly treated as negative, such an assumption is dangerous. Diagnoses that are never recorded or identified can present the scenario in which two individuals may appear the same from a record standpoint,but infactpresentsignificantlydifferentclinicaloutcomes.Further,there is a well-established issue in the ability to record clinical conditions completely within any particular coding languages [57]. Thus, in an effort to address this lackofagroundtruthformissingdiagnoses,manymachinelearningapproaches utilize only positive entities, in essence, formulating a one-class problem.
14 Feldman et al. This inturn leadsto the secondpoint ofconcern,where eveninthe scenario in which a diagnosis is recorded, such data is not guaranteed to be correct. As diagnosisinformation is often obtained thougha diagnostic test, it is important to remember these tests are subjective. Each test is associated with its own performance range quantified by metrics such as sensitivity and specificity, predictive values,chance-correctedmeasuresofagreement,orlikelihoodratios[58]. Without the ability to identify false positives/negatives, or to link to follow-up tests or corrections, these results represent a significant source of error which can propagate through an algorithmic model.
5.2 Implications to Machine Learning Thechallengesassociatedwiththevalidationandverificationofhealthcaredata impactfarmorethanapplication-specificperformance,reachingtotheintermittent steps of the algorithms underlying the solutions themselves. In particular, the complexities of healthcare data impacts both the internal distance metric utilized, as well as the generalized optimization problem of parameter tuning. Although simplistic in definition, the notion of distance represents a fundamental attribute in the execution of machine learning algorithms. The ability to quantify a pair of similar or dissimilar points is a concept utilized in determining decision boundaries, as well as updates for weights. Such a concept has become increasingly important as a result of the heterogeneity exhibited by the growing set of healthcare data discussed prior. While work by Brian Kulis highlights extensions of the metric learning problems to a variety of problems in computer vision, text analysis, and multimedia, these extensions represent nontrivial altercations to the concept of what constitutes distance [59]. Fromanoptimizationstandpoint,inanefforttomoreaccuratelymodelcomplex real-world systems, an increasingly complex set of learning models have become available. Although these models have the potential to improve performance, there often exist a number of parameters (regularization strengths, number of weak learners,slack variables)that must be tuned to fit the data beingmodeled[60,61].While specificsoftheirimplementationcanvarygreatly,to preventtheneedtosweeptheentiretyoftheparameterspace,amodel’sparameters can be estimated through optimization techniques applied to an objective function of the users choosing. As there exist a range of possible optimizations, many stemming from a methodology known as gradient decent, an understanding of the data itself is paramount. Variability in how the specified objective function accounts for factors suchas class imbalance orinter-feature correlation can result in markedly different results drawn from the same data [62–64]. Finally, it is important to note that validation and verification have often constituted major components in the assessment of model output, for both its generalizabilityandoverallcorrectness.While criticalto their real-worldutility, these concerns directly impact the inferences drawn from model output, and as such,existoutsidethescopeofthischapter.Anexcellentsurveyaddressingsuch items can be found in the work by Sokolova and Lapalme [65].
The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 15
6 Open Problems This work has served as a foundation highlighting a broad set of considerations that must be addressed as machine learning works to establish its place in the healthcare industry. However, as clinical practice, administration, and research becomes increasingly intertwined with the statistical methodologies of machine learning,thereremainsanumberofopenproblems.Inthe sectionstofollow,we discuss a subset of the most pressing and active areas of research.
6.1 Temporal Relations As healthcare data has undergone the transition from a paper-based entity to digital records, much of the focus has fallen to the purely technical aspects of storing, processing, and modeling such a complex set of variables. Amongst these considerations,however,we often forgetto reflect on whether the data we consume accuratelyreflects the processesitcaptures.Inparticular,wefind that anoverwhelmingmajority ofworkshave recordedand modeledthe conditionof an individual as a set of discrete observations. Although such an approach allows for data to be easily consumed by traditional machine learning approaches, formalizing the presence of each entity recorded as a feature, such a representation is incomplete. It is clear observations such as a diagnosis or procedure must occur at a single point in time, however, it would be naive to believe that such elements of health occur in isolation. Rather, there exist temporal relations connecting them, representing the variablenatureofanindividual’shealth.Theserelationscannotbedescribedby one feature or a single value, but require longitudinal observations with a series of values over time [66]. However, this is a nontrivial task from both a computational and clinical standpoint. Taking the example of a patients diagnosis history, the computational complexity of tracking the progression of multiple concurrent diagnoses canquicklybecomeintractableoneventhelargestofsystems,whilefromaclinical standpoint, many diagnoses have no direct progression, where others may split amongst a broad set of co-morbid diagnoses.
6.2 Alternative Representations Building on the notion that continued improvement of machine learning approaches to problems in the healthcare domain may require a shift in our data organization, such as the ability to capture temporal relations, there exists a significant effort to employ varying frameworks to represent the complexity of healthcare data. Perhaps the most well explored representationcan be found in the application of computational networks. Networks represent an established fieldofinterdisciplinaryresearchandpresentaneffectivemethodto capturethe direct relationbetween two arbitraryfeatures,be that a connectionbetween individuals themselves, links between comorbid diagnoses,or genomic-phenotypic relations [67,68]. Such a representation offers many attractive properties, such
16 Feldman et al. as the ability to alleviate sparsity by connecting only those elements associated with an instance, and the ability to representheterogeneous data. However,the analyticmethodsappliedtonetworksfocusprimarilyondescribingconnectivity, with measures such as centrality,degree,and betweenness, rather than the generative or discriminative models constructed to describe the relations between various healthcare features. Inanefforttocapturesuchrelations,tensorrepresentationshaveemerged.A tensoris amultidimensionalarrayspanning anarbitrarynumber ofdimensions, each representing a single feature or modality. Such a representation is advantageous to many areas of healthcare including the ability to capture a series of observationsovertimeorintegratedataacrossmultipleexperimentalconditions and analyze them simultaneously [69]. Although tensors are only emerging in their application to healthcare, mathematical operations known as decompositionshavedemonstratedtheirvalueindiscoveringlatentgroupsineachmodality and identify group-wise interactions [70].
6.3 Integration with Clinicians and Clinical Workflows Despitetheimmensetechnologicaladvancementsinthecollectionandprocessing of health data, it is important to remember that no system can succeed on its own. We would be remiss in failing to highlight that the impact of machine learningin healthcarecannotbe discussedin isolation.Medicalresearchis itself anevolvingfield,andanunderstandingofthebiologicalprocessesbeingmodeled requiresamoretechnicalapproach.Trulycapturingsuchphenomenawillrequire close interdisciplinary collaborations with those individuals whose expertise lies in the exploration and discernment of healthcare. Itis perhapsmore appropriateto view the continueddevelopmentofhealthcareinformaticsas partofthe complexsystemencompassingclinicalworkflows. Inrelationtothecollectionandaggregationofdata,itisimportanttonotethat any increase in data collection poses tangle logistic concerns to those individuals involved in the care of an individual. For example, while it may be more accurate to assess an individual’s condition every minute, such granularity is often not feasible. As a result, there must be an increasing focus on developing innovative ways to utilize data collected as part of existing workflows, rather than demonstrating value with models requiring additional data elements. On the other end of the spectrum, in relation to model output, it is important to remember that regardless of the analytic approach used; a patient’s treatment ultimately remains inthe hands oftheir clinician.As such,there mustbe a concertedefforttoprovideappropriatecontexttotheresults.Designingapproaches withthecapabilitytoquantifyfactorssuchasconfidence,highlightingasystems strengths, and its weaknesses, for the individual consuming the information.
7 Conclusion and Future Outlook Complexity comes in many forms, and beyond the sheer volume of data created,the attributesofhealthcaredatapresentavastsetofheterogeneous,high-
The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 17 dimensional,probabilistic,incomplete,uncertain,andnoisyattributes.However, in conjunction with machine learning methodologies, the increasing availability of data has the potential to provide novel and actionable insights to the field of healthcare. With this in mind, it is important to remember that although we may have reached a point computationally in which the manipulation of Big Data and execution of complex modeling techniques are possible, purely possessing such capability is not sufficient to ensure the realizationof informatics true potential in healthcare. The ability to address such complexities and ensure the effective consumptionofhealthcaredataintothemachinelearningpipelinereliesonmore than analytic capability: it relies on a deep understanding of the biological and clinical mechanisms through which the data has been generated. Frompreprocessing,to modeling,to the interpretationofmodeloutput, this work has presented a general discussion regarding the fundamental challenges presentedbysuchdatawithrespecttotheinformaticspipeline.However,awareness of suchan impactis only the first step.It is our hope thatothers will draw on these caveats and look to considerations in the design and implementation of new works, which blend together both technological capability and medical understanding to better serve those individuals in need. References
1. Yoo,I.,Alafaireet, P.,Marinov,M.,Pena-Hernandez,K.,Gopidi,R.,Chang,J.F., Hua, L.: Data mining in healthcare and biomedicine: a survey of the literature. Journal of medical systems 36(4) (2012) 2431–2448
2. Jensen, P.B., Jensen, L.J., Brunak, S.: Mining electronic health records: towards better research applications and clinical care. Nature Reviews Genetics 13(6)
(2012) 395–405
3. Hughes,G.: Howbigisbigdatainhealthcare. Fromashotinthearmblog(2011)
4. Raghupathi, W., Raghupathi, V.: Big data analytics in healthcare: promise and potential. Health Information Science and Systems2(1) (2014) 3
5. Han, J., Pei, J., Kamber, M.: Data mining: concepts and techniques. Elsevier
(2011)
6. Murphy,K.P.: Machine learning: a probabilistic perspective. MIT press (2012)
7. Sammut, C., Webb, G.I.: Encyclopedia of machine learning. Springer Science & Business Media (2011)
8. Kantardzic, M.: Data mining: concepts, models, methods, and algorithms. John Wiley & Sons(2011)
9. Diamond, M.: Mastering Medical Coding. Elsevier Health Sciences (2013)
10. Tan, P.N., et al.: Introduction to data mining. Pearson Education India(2006)
11. Tsymbal,A.:Theproblemofconceptdrift:definitionsandrelatedwork.Computer Science Department,Trinity College Dublin 106(2) (2004)
12. Rahm,E.,Do,H.H.: Datacleaning:Problemsandcurrentapproaches. IEEEData Eng. Bull. 23(4) (2000) 3–13
13. King, L.A., Fisher, J., Jacquin, L., Zeltwanger, P.: The digital hospital: opportunitiesandchallenges. Journalofhealthcareinformationmanagement:JHIM17(1)
(2002) 37–45
18 Feldman et al.
14. Andreu-Perez,J.,Leff,D.R.,Ip,H.M.,Yang,G.Z.: Fromwearablesensorstosmart implants—toward pervasive and personalized healthcare. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 62(12) (2015) 2750–2762
15. Kidd,C.D., Orr, R.,Abowd, G.D., Atkeson,C.G., Essa, I.A., MacIntyre,B., Mynatt, E., Starner, T.E., Newstetter, W.: The aware home: A living laboratory for ubiquitous computing research. In: International Workshop on Cooperative Buildings, Springer(1999) 191–198
16. Caceres,C.A.: MedicalDevices–measurement,QualityAssurance,andStandards. Number800. ASTMInternational (1983)
17. Koumoundouros,E.:Clinicalengineeringanduncertaintyinclinicalmeasurements. Australasian physical& engineering sciences in medicine 37(3) (2014) 467
18. Bland, J.M., Altman, D.G.: Statistics notes: measurement error. Bmj 313(7059)
(1996) 744
19. Sethi,N.,Sethi,J.,Torgovnick,E.,Arsura,E.: Physiologicalandnon-physiological eeg artifacts. The Internet Journal of Neuromonitoring 5(1) (2007)
20. Wood,A.M., White,I.R.,Thompson,S.G.: Aremissing outcomedataadequately handled?areviewofpublishedrandomizedcontrolledtrialsinmajormedicaljournals. Clinical trials 1(4) (2004) 368–376
21. Little, R.J., D’agostino, R., Cohen, M.L., Dickersin, K., Emerson, S.S., Farrar, J.T., Frangakis, C., Hogan, J.W., Molenberghs, G., Murphy, S.A., et al.: The prevention and treatment of missing data in clinical trials. New England Journal of Medicine 367(14) (2012) 1355–1360
22. Marlin, B.M., Kale, D.C., Khemani, R.G., Wetzel, R.C.: Unsupervised pattern discovery in electronic health care data using probabilistic clustering models. In: Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGHIT International Health Informatics Symposium, ACM (2012) 389–398
23. Azarm-Daigle, M., Kuziemsky, C., Peyton, L.: A review of cross organizational healthcare data sharing. Procedia Computer Science 63 (2015) 425–432
24. Quan, H., Li, B., Duncan Saunders, L., Parsons, G.A., Nilsson, C.I., Alibhai, A., Ghali, W.A.: Assessing validity of icd-9-cm and icd-10 administrative data in recording clinical conditions in a unique dually coded database. Health services research 43(4) (2008) 1424–1441
25. : International classification of diseases, (icd-10-cm/pcs) transition (Oct 2015)
26. Meyer,H.: Codingcomplexity:Ushealthcaregetsreadyforthecomingoficd-10. Health Affairs 30(5) (2011) 968–974
27. Fisher, E.S., Whaley, F.S., Krushat, W.M., Malenka, D.J., Fleming, C., Baron, J.A., Hsia, D.C.: The accuracy of medicare’s hospital claims data: progress has beenmade, butproblemsremain. American journalof publichealth 82(2) (1992)
243–248
28. MacIntyre, C.R., Ackland, M.J., Chandraraj, E.J., Pilla, J.E.: Accuracy of icd–
9–cm codes in hospital morbidity data, victoria: implications for public health research. Australian and New Zealand journal of publichealth 21(5) (1997) 477–
482
29. Cortes,C.,Jackel,L.D.,Chiang,W.P.,etal.: Limitsonlearningmachineaccuracy imposed by dataquality. In:KDD.Volume 95. (1995) 57–62
30. Vapnik,V.N.,Vapnik,V.: Statistical learning theory.Volume 1. Wiley New York
(1998)
31. Kearns, M.J., Vazirani, U.V.: An introduction to computational learning theory. MIT press (1994)
32. Sessions, V., Valtorta, M.: The effects of data quality on machine learning algorithms. ICIQ 6 (2006) 485–498
The Impact of Complex Healthcare Data on theMachine Learning Pipeline 19
33. Knorr, E.M., Ng, R.T., Tucakov, V.: Distance-based outliers: algorithms and applications.TheVLDBJournalTheInternationalJournalonVeryLargeDataBases
8(3-4) (2000) 237–253
34. Bacioiu, A.S., Sauntry, D.M., Boyle, J.S., Wong, L.C.W., Leonard, P.F., Chandrasekar, R.: Method and apparatus for analysis and decomposition of classifier data anomalies (September16 2008) US Patent 7,426,497.
35. Little, R., Rubin,D.: Statistical analysis with missing data. (1987)
36. Arbuckle,J.L., Marcoulides, G.A.,Schumacker,R.E.: Fullinformation estimation inthepresenceofincompletedata. Advancedstructuralequationmodeling:Issues and techniques243 (1996) 277
37. Rubin, D.B.: Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys. Volume 81. John Wiley & Sons(2004)
38. Collins, L.M., Schafer,J.L., Kam,C.M.: Acomparison ofinclusiveandrestrictive strategies in modern missing data procedures. Psychological methods 6(4) (2001)
330
39. Graham, J.W.: Missing data theory. In:Missing Data. Springer(2012) 3–46
40. Rector, A.L., Brandt, S.: Why do it the hard way? the case for an expressive description logic for snomed. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 15(6) (2008) 744–751
41. Lindenauer,P.K.,Lagu,T.,Shieh,M.S.,Pekow,P.S.,Rothberg,M.B.: Association ofdiagnosticcodingwithtrendsinhospitalizations andmortalityofpatientswith pneumonia, 2003-2009. Jama 307(13) (2012) 1405–1413
42. Weber,G.M.,Mandl,K.D.,Kohane,I.S.: Findingthemissinglinkforbigbiomedical data. Jama 311(24) (2014) 2479–2480
43. Stoto,M.A.: Population health intheAffordableCare Actera.Volume1. AcademyHealth Washington, DC (2013)
44. Feldman, K., Hazekamp, N., Chawla, N.V.: Mining the clinical narrative: All text are not equal. In: Healthcare Informatics (ICHI), 2016 IEEE International Conference on, IEEE (2016) 271–280
45. Visscher, P.M., Brown, M.A., McCarthy, M.I., Yang, J.: Five years of gwas discovery. The American Journal of Human Genetics 90(1) (2012) 7–24
46. Lewis, D.P., Jebara, T., Noble, W.S.: Support vector machine learning from heterogeneousdata:anempiricalanalysisusingproteinsequenceandstructure.Bioinformatics 22(22) (2006) 2753–2760
47. Diamond,C.C., Mostashari, F., Shirky,C.: Collecting and sharing data for population health: a new paradigm. Health affairs 28(2) (2009) 454–466
48. Hillestad,R.: Identitycrisis: Anexamination ofthecostsandbenefitsofaunique patient identifierfor theUS health care system. RandCorporation (2008)
49. Fan,J., Han,F.,Liu,H.: Challenges ofbigdataanalysis. National sciencereview
1(2) (2014) 293–314
50. Johnstone, I.M., Titterington, D.M.: Statistical challenges of high-dimensional data (2009)
51. Lafferty,J.D.,Wasserman,L.:Challengesinstatisticalmachinelearning.Statistica Sinica 16 (2006) 307
52. He, H., Garcia, E.A.: Learning from imbalanced data. IEEE Transactions on knowledge and data engineering 21(9) (2009) 1263–1284
53. L´opez, V., Ferna´ndez, A., Garc´ıa, S., Palade, V., Herrera, F.: An insight into classification withimbalanced data:Empirical resultsand currenttrendson using data intrinsic characteristics. Information Sciences 250 (2013) 113–141
54. Box, G.E.: Robustness in thestrategy of scientific model building. Robustness in statistics 1 (1979) 201–236
20 Feldman et al.
55. Oreskes, N., Shrader-Frechette,K., Belitz, K., et al.: Verification, validation, and confirmation of numerical models in theearth sciences. Science 263(5147) (1994)
641–646
56. Szummer,M.O.: Learningfrom partially labeled data. PhDthesis,Massachusetts Instituteof Technology (2002)
57. GensingerJr,R.A.,CPHIMS,F.:Analyticsinhealthcare:Anintroduction,HIMSS
(2014)
58. Glas,A.S.,Lijmer,J.G.,Prins,M.H.,Bonsel,G.J.,Bossuyt,P.M.: Thediagnostic oddsratio:asingleindicatoroftest performance. Journalofclinical epidemiology
56(11) (2003) 1129–1135
59. Kulis,B.,etal.: Metriclearning:Asurvey. FoundationsandTrends(cid:13)R inMachine Learning 5(4) (2013) 287–364
60. Arcuri,A.,Fraser,G.: Parametertuningordefaultvalues?anempiricalinvestigation in search-based software engineering. Empirical Software Engineering 18(3)
(2013) 594–623
61. Hoos, H.H.: Automated algorithm configuration and parameter tuning. In: Autonomous search. Springer(2011) 37–71
62. Kelley,C.T.: Iterative methods for optimization. SIAM(1999)
63. Sra, S., Nowozin, S., Wright, S.J.: Optimization for machine learning. Mit Press
(2012)
64. Lange, K., Chi, E.C., Zhou, H.: A brief survey of modern optimization for statisticians. International Statistical Review 82(1) (2014) 46–70
65. Sokolova, M., Lapalme, G.: A systematic analysis of performance measures for classification tasks. Information Processing & Management 45(4) (2009) 427–437
66. Zhao, J., Papapetrou, P., Asker, L., Bostro¨m, H.: Learning from heterogeneous temporal data in electronic health records. Journal of Biomedical Informatics 65
(2017) 105–119
67. Carter, H., Hofree, M., Ideker, T.: Genotype to phenotype via network analysis. Current opinion in genetics & development 23(6) (2013) 611–621
68. Feldman,K.,Stiglic,G.,Dasgupta,D.,Kricheff,M.,Obradovic,Z.,Chawla,N.V.: Insights into population health management through disease diagnoses networks. ScientificReports 6 (2016)
69. Hunyadi, B., Van Huffel, S., De Vos, M.: The power of tensor decompositions in biomedical applications. (2016)
70. Luo, Y., Wang, F., Szolovits, P.: Tensor factorization toward precision medicine. Briefings in bioinformatics 18(3) (2017) 511–514