Machine learning manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor) Explanatory machine learning for sequential human teaching Lun Ai · Johannes Langer · Stephen H. Muggleton · Ute Schmid Abstract The topic of comprehensibility of machine-learned theories has recently drawnincreasingattention.InductiveLogicProgramming(ILP)useslogicprogrammingtoderivelogictheoriesfromsmalldatabasedonabductionandinductiontechniques. Learned theories are represented in the form of rules as declarative descriptionsofobtainedknowledge.Inearlierwork,theauthorsprovidedthefirstevidenceof ameasurableincreaseinhumancomprehensionbasedonmachine-learnedlogicrules forsimpleclassificationtasks.Inalaterstudy,itwasfoundthatthepresentationof machine-learned explanations to humans can produce both beneficial and harmful effectsinthecontextofgamelearning.Wecontinueourinvestigationofcomprehensibility by examining the effects of the ordering of concept presentations on human comprehension.Inthiswork,weexaminetheexplanatoryeffectsofcurriculumorder andthepresenceofmachine-learnedexplanationsforsequentialproblem-solving.We showthat1)thereexisttasksAandBsuchthatlearningAbeforelearningBresults in better comprehension for humans in comparison to learning B before learning A and2)thereexisttasksAandBsuchthatthepresenceofexplanationswhenlearning A contributes to improved human comprehension when subsequently learning B. We propose a framework for the effects of sequential teaching on comprehension based on an existing definition of comprehensibility and provide evidence for supportfromdatacollectedinhumantrials.Ourempiricalstudyinvolvescurriculathat teach novices the merge sort algorithm. Our results show that sequential teaching of concepts with increasing complexity a) has a beneficial effect on human comprehension and b) leads to human re-discovery of divide-and-conquer problem-solving strategies,andc)allowsadaptationsofhumanproblem-solvingstrategywithbetter performance when machine-learned explanations are also presented. Keywords Explainable artificial intelligence; Machine learning comprehensibility; Meta-interpretive learning; Inductive logic programming. LunAi(cid:0) DepartmentofComputing,ImperialCollegeLondon,London,UK E-mail:lun.ai15@imperial.ac.uk JohannesLanger UniversityofBamberg,Bamberg,Germany E-mail:johannes-miran.langer@stud.uni-bamberg.de StephenH.Muggleton DepartmentofComputing,ImperialCollegeLondon,London,UK E-mail:s.muggleton@imperial.ac.uk UteSchmid CognitiveSystemsGroup,UniversityofBamberg,Bamberg,Germany E-mail:ute.schmid@uni-bamberg.de
3202 raM
62
]IA.sc[
2v05201.5022:viXra
2 LunAietal.
1 Introduction Human learning can be described as a concept formation progression in which observations of objects and events are summarised and formulated by some interdependent hierarchical structure [37]. As an example, in the context of teaching algorithms to human students, we may imagine a human teacher using the material in Figure 1 for teaching the merge sort algorithm. In a bottom-up teaching approach with increasing concept complexity, students learn how to merge first (left) and then move on to study sorting (right). In contrast, via a top-down teaching approachwhichpresentsconceptswithdecreasingcomplexity,studentslearntosort first(right)withoutpriorknowledgeofmergingandstudymergingafterwards(left). Itmightbeofinteresttothehumanteachertoquestionwhichapproachyieldshigher student sorting performance and what effects the two teaching approaches have on students’ sorting strategies. Fig. 1: An illustration of teaching materials of merging and sorting that can be learned in incremental order (left to right). All fruits have different weights which can be pairwise compared using the balance scale at the corner. On the left-hand side,twosetsofapplesshouldbemergedintoalargercollectioninincreasingweights from left to right. On the right-hand side, a set of bananas needs to be arranged in increasing weights from left to right. It was stressed by the Machine Learning pioneer Donald Michie [60] that an intelligent machine not only needs to excel humans in performance but should also possess the capacity to effectively interact with and transfer knowledge to humans. An intelligent machine can in this way fulfil an integrated role that contributes to boththe“stock ofsoftware” andthe“stockof knowledge”[60].Owing toincreasing awareness of the importance of explainable AI, reported by comprehensive reviews
[1,9,63], a great number of studies have emerged with an emphasis on systems that provide support for human understanding. In addition, there is an increasing emphasisonAIthatinteractstokeephumans“intheloop”[62,79].However,owingto the absence of quantifiable definitions and evaluation procedures, some issues such as ambiguity and lack of empirical evaluations have been highlighted [36,54,62]. At the intersection of these two paradigms is the research area that focuses on the comprehensibility of machine learning. An operational definition of comprehensibility was provided in [82] for examining machine-human teaching interaction. This definition relates human comprehension to the out-of-sample prediction accu-
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 3 racyofhumanlearnersafterstudyingtrainingexamplesandamachine-learnedlogic program. It allowed the first demonstration [66] of Michie’s Ultra-Strong Machine Learning (USML) which stressed the role of teaching machine-learned knowledge to humanssuchthattheirproficiencyonataskcanberaisedtoahigherlevelwithrespect to learning from randomly selected examples. Later results in [2] showed that explanations generated from machine-learned logic programs can have both beneficial and harmful effects on human comprehension and suggested, via a cognitive window framework, that explanatory effects are dependent on both descriptive and executional complexity. Despite the classification of explanatory effectiveness in [2], the effects of the order of concepts in a teaching curriculum on human learning - an essential topic of machine learning and human problem solving that has yet to be exploredforunderstandingthecomprehensibilityofmachine-learnedlogicprograms. Based on established results and teaching procedures in [2,66], in this work, we extend the frameworks of comprehensibility and explanatory effects to account for the impacts of sequential teaching on comprehension. We refer to the cognitive window framework which attributes the explanatory effects to 1) the descriptive complexity of machine-learned rules and 2) the cost of knowledge application with respecttoanexecutionstack.Ahumantrialofsequentialteachingwasconductedto examine the effects of concept ordering in curricula and explanations in the context of learning an efficient sorting strategy. We hypothesise the improvement of human comprehension from sequential teaching as the result of the reduction in the size of the hypothesis space associated with the target concept definition. Our proposed framework is consistent with empirical evidence collected from the human trial involving participants with no background in programming. We summarise the paper’s contributions as follows:
– We define a measure to evaluate beneficial/harmful explanatory effects of a sequential teaching curriculum on human comprehension.
– Wehypothesisetheimprovementofhumancomprehensionfromsequentialteaching curricula based on the Blumer bound [17].
– Wedemonstratebasedonananalysisofempiricalresultsthatasequentialteaching curriculum with increasing concept complexity has a beneficial effect on human comprehension.
– We show results that indicate the re-discovery of divide-and-conquer algorithms after human novices learn from concepts with increasing complexity.
– Weprovideevidenceoftheoptimisationofproblem-solvingstrategyasaresultof additionally studying explanations generated from machine-learned logic rules. This paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we review the literature relevant to the paper. In Section 3, we present our theoretical framework of sequential teaching curricula. In Section 4, we describe our empirical approach including the experimentalhypotheses.InSection5,weshowtheresultsofourmainAmazonMechanicalTurkexperimentthatinvolvedteachinghumanparticipantstosortbasedon thetraining ofmerging twoordered sequences. InSection5.5, weprovideadetailed discussion of our findings on the effects of curriculum order and explanations on human comprehension. In Section 6, we provide a review of our work and comment onourcontributions.Weadditionallydiscussfutureextensionstothedemonstrated results, behavioural cloning and human knowledge re-discovery.
4 LunAietal.
2 Related work This section summarises related research on human-machine teaching interactions andhighlightsourmotivations.Wegiveanoverviewofrelatedresultsinhumanlearning in Psychology. This is followed by a brief account of learning between humans and machines and objective means for evaluating the comprehensibility of machine explanations.
2.1 Human learning in curricula with explanations Theabilityofhumanstorecogniseandextractknowledgeusefultoaproblem-solving contextisdependentonpriorexperienceandunderstandingofrelateddomains[10]. While a classification decision is dependent only on information concerning the currentstate,goal-directeddecision-makingrequiresconsiderationofadecision’spossibleeffectonfuturestates[14].Forsequentialdecision-makingtaskssuchastheTower ofHanoi,statetransitionsoftheproblemsolutioncanbeexplicitlyexpressedbyrules
[83].“Chunking”reusablesub-goalswasdemonstratedasanefficientproblem-solving approach to encode problem-solution structures and reduce the load on short-term memory [10]. Therelianceofhumanproblemsolvingontheproblemdomainandexperienceof aperson[33]canbeattributedtoimplicit(System1)andexplicit(System2)knowledge[46].Incontrasttoimplicitknowledgewhichisonlyattainablethroughpractice, declarative knowledge can be transferred explicitly in the form of explanations [25]. For knowledge accumulation, explicit explanations and hints help make sense of the newinformationandallowintegrationintoexistingknowledge[35].Inthecontextof solvingsimplelogicalproblems[27,48]andgeneratingLOGOprograms[51],guided learninghasbeendemonstratedmoreefficientthanexploration-orientedapproaches. However, multiple studies suggest that explanations should not be presented alone. Asdemonstratedby[3,6,16],humanlearnersdonotalwaysbenefitfromexplanations whenthespecificproblem-solvingcontextisabsent.Thecombinationofexplicitguidanceandworkedexamplesprovidesagoodhands-onproblem-solvingexperiencefor learners to study and practise for themselves due to the limited capacity of working memory [90]. The presentation of worked examples along with explanations makes this specific task context available and was shown to support learning [4,75].
2.2 Teaching between the machine and humans Machine teaching is an area of machine learning that focuses on the optimisation of training sets and the design of teaching protocols in an example-based setting
[96]. Studies in machine teaching have provided formal methods for teaching situations in which the goal is to train human students via an optimal set of examples to learn a target hypothesis. The machine teacher in these setups [55,73,93] is providedinformationaboutthequantifiedcognitivemodelofthehumanlearnerandhas access to the learning progress based on the student’s responses to examples. The teachercanthenmonitorthereactionsofstudentswhichallowstheteachertomake adjustments to teaching materials. However, often excessive assumptions about the teacher’sknowledgearemadeforderivingtheoreticalresults.Theteacherisusually
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 5 assumedtohaveperfectknowledgeaboutthecomputationalmodelofstudentssuch astheirlearningrateandtheirbackgroundknowledge[32].Thus,owingtothespecificity of these theoretical models, they are difficult to apply in real-world teaching settings. Communicationofmachine-learnedsolutionscanbealternativelyrealisedthrough explanations in the form of rules. For Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) [67], systems use logic programs to represent hypotheses as generalisations of examples and background knowledge. ILP systems make use of both induction and abduction, which are critical mechanisms for human knowledge attainment [43,52]. A hypothesis learned by an ILP algorithm is represented as a set of rules and can be used to communicatethediscoveredknowledgetohumans.Forinstance,anILPsystem[13] learnsoptimalstrategiesofchessendgamesfordepths0,1and2andincorporatesa complexityconstraintonthenumberofclausesinapredicatedefinitionbasedonthe hypothesised limitation of working memory capacity of 7±2 “chunks” [61]. A fully automated discovery system [47] re-discovers the role of genes of known function by combining ILP-based scientific discovery software with a laboratory robot. In [88], the ILP system produces hypotheses as logic rules that depict the chemical connectivity of molecules and predict mutagenicity, which accommodates collaboration withahumanchemist.However,inmostsystems,itremainsanongoingchallengeto ensurehumanunderstandingduetothehighcomplexityofinformationencodedvia these interfaces. In a recent work [2], it was shown that visual and textual explanations for playing a simple two-player game, generated based on rules learned by an ILP system, may cause improvement or degradation in human comprehension after a brief study. The authors demonstrated that the outcome of studying explanations provided is affected by a cognitive window which takes account of the descriptive complexity and execution requirements of the rules.
2.3 Operational measures of human understanding in AI Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) is an area of AI that studies AI systems that allow human understanding by providing human-readable explanations of decisions based on structures and functions. Researchers have attempted to devise AI systems to present knowledge attained in various formats, such as texts [42,56], visualisations[72,77,91,92]andvisualisation-texthybriddemonstrations[80].Simpler explanationsoflocalpredictionscanbedevisedtoprovidealocalisedunderstanding ofalearnedclassificationmodel[76].Forreinforcementlearningapplications,learned strategiesareimplicitlyencodedbypolicyfunctionswithcontinuousdomainswhich are difficult for humans to understand. This concern about the opacity of learned strategies was addressed by incorporating the use of relational biases [22,34,94] to enhance human understandability. In addition, case-based summaries of a policy [5] fromsetsofselectedstatesinalargerstatespaceofanagentallowalimitedhuman understanding of the agent’s decisions. In XAI, there exists a diversity of motivations and technical descriptions of systems which support human understanding. Terms such as transparency, interpretability, explainability and comprehensibility are frequently used terms at the core of XAI [11]. Transparency typically refers to the ability of a model or a system to be human-understandable on its own [11]. Interpretability relates to the degree of clarity of information revealed to the user by a system [63]. Explainability
6 LunAietal. stresses the role of a system as an “explainer” interface to the user [11]. Comprehensibility denotes a system’s ability to represent machine-learned knowledge in a human-understandableformat[11,39].However,owingtotheabsenceofoperational definitions and procedures of evaluation, a great body of recent results was establishedbasedonsubjectiveviews[36,62]whicharediscordant[54]withrespecttothe sub-problemofXAIthatthestudiesattemptedtoaddress.Studieswereoftenfound to report limited empirical evidence as support of the proclaimed effect and did not take into consideration that human understanding is just as vital as the computational procedures that generate explanatory information [62]. It was stressed in [1] thatagreatbodyofstudiesdidnotevaluatetheeffectofexplanationsontheirtarget users.Thoseworksthatdidincludeexplanatoryeffectevaluationsoftenfailedtoprovide a good account of the context, results and limitations [9]. A number of reports also brought to attention the potential misinterpretation and misuse of explanatory information. For example, partially transparent explanatory information may cause moreconfusionifkeydecision-makingofsystemsisomitted[78].Theauthorsin[89] expressed trustworthiness concern and showed that human decision-making overrelied on the intelligent system even when explanatory information provided by the system was inaccurate. Theimportanceofcomprehensibilityhaslongbeenrecognisedinmachinelearningofhuman-orientedknowledge.Michalski[57]suggestedthatcomprehensiblemachinelearningshouldproduceoutputsthatsharesimilarstructureandsemanticsas those produced by human experts and should present learned knowledge in humanunderstandable “chunks”. Owing to the challenges of quantification, comprehensibility has usually been associated with the complexity of machine-learned models
[41]. Research on the operational definition of machine learning comprehensibility can be traced back to Michie’s definition of Ultra-Strong Machine Learning in the
1980s[59].Thiscriterionstressesmachinelearners’abilitytoteachhypothesestohumanssuchthattheirperformanceoverthetaskisimprovedbyasubstantialmargin compared with human learning alone. An operational definition of comprehensibility [66,82] was proposed which assesses human comprehension based on the human out-of-sampleclassificationaccuracy.Inrecentwork[2],bothbeneficialandharmful effects of explanatory machine learning were identified in the context of symbolic machine learning. However, the effects of the teaching order of concepts on human comprehension have not been fully explored in the literature on machine learning comprehensibility.
3 Theoretical framework To introduce our theoretical framework, in Section 3.1 we begin by referring to the logic notations and background of Meta-Interpretive Learning (MIL) [65]. A MIL system Metagol [30] has been modified in Section 3.2 to learn a logic theory of O sortingasexplanationsinourempiricalhumantrial.InSection3.3,theframeworks of comprehensibility [82] and explanatory effects [2] have been extended to account for sequential teaching curricula containing “blocks” of teaching materials. In Section3.4,werefertothecognitivecostofalogicprogram[82]whichwasproposedto approximatethecomplexityofthehumanexecutionofthelogicprogramashumans simulatetheknowledgebeingtaught.Wedescribethecognitivewindowandsequen-
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 7 tial teaching improvement conjectures in Section 3.5 based on [2] and our proposed new framework.
3.1 Meta-interpretive learning An Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) [67] algorithm uses background knowledge B toinduceahypothesisintheformofalogicprogramwhichentailsallofthepositiveexamplesE+ andnoneofthenegativeexamplesE−.Meta-InterpretiveLearning
(MIL) [65] is a variant of ILP which supports predicate invention [65], dependent learning [53] and learning of recursive and higher-order programs. A MIL algorithm solves the following problem: given a tuple (B, M, E+, E−, I, H) where the backgroundknowledgeBisafirst-orderlogicprogram,Misasetofsecond-orderclauses, positiveexamplesE+andnegativeexamplesE−aregroundatoms,learnsalogicprogram H such that
∀e+ ∈E+ M ∪H ∪ B|=e+
∀e− ∈E− M ∪H ∪ B6|=e− M ∪B|=H I is a set of predicate symbols reserved for predicate invention. Output logic program H is a hypothesis in the hypothesis space H described by a finite number of predicate symbols and constants. The background knowledge B contains a set of predicate definitions as primitives. The set of second-order clauses M is referred to asmeta-rules.Eachmeta-rulecontainsexistentiallyquantifiedsecond-ordervariables anduniversallyquantifiedfirst-ordervariables.AMILalgorithmemploysmeta-rules and substitutes second-order variables with predicate symbols to derive first-order theories as logical generalisations.
3.2 MIL for learning sorting algorithm TheMILsystemMetagol [31]isanimplementationofameta-interpreterinProlog. Metagolsupportspredicateinventionanddependentlearningwhichreducesthesize ofthehypothesisspaceandimproveslearningperformance[28].Metagol [30]makes O use of composite objects and actions defined from primitive objects and actions. Metagol addresses the issue that most ILP systems only considered the textual O complexity of hypothesis programs. The inability to distinguish two algorithms, for instance, insertion sort and quick sort, would result in the less computationally efficient but textually compact algorithm being learned. Both textual and resource costs of hypothesis programs are minimised by Metagol using a technique called O iterative descent [30] which computes the resource cost of hypotheses of increasing sizesaccordingtoapre-definedcostfunction.Forlearningrobotpostmanandrobot sorting strategies, the background knowledge is defined in composite actions and objectsandprovidedtoMetagol .TheauthorsshowedthatMetagol convergesto O O hypotheses with the optimal resource complexity and learns resource-efficient robot strategies [30]. We modify the background knowledge of Metagol for learning a bottom-up O variant of the merge sort algorithm [40] for sorting positive integers. Merge sort is
8 LunAietal. Table 1: When the robot performs parse_exprs/2, it parses two expressions by removingthe“<”symbols,anditputsonesequenceofnumbersintotheleftbagand the other sequence of numbers into the right bag. compare_nums/2 first selects a numberfromtheleftbagandanumberfromtherightbag.Thenitcomparesthetwo numbers.Afterwards,compare_nums/2usesthesmallernumbertoextendthelast expressioninthememoryandputsthelargernumberbackinitsoriginalbag.When one of the bags is empty, the robot performs drop_bag_remaining/2 to append the rest of the numbers to the last expression in the memory. recycle_memory/2 takesallexpressionsinthememoryandfillstheexpressionlistexprs.single_expr/2 checks if there exists only one expression in the expression list exprs. Definition Rules merger/2 merger(A,B):-parse_exprs(A,C),merger_1(C,B). merger_1(A,B):- compare_nums(A,C),merger_1(C,B) merger_1(A,B):-compare_nums(A,C),drop_bag_remaining(C,B). sorter/2 sorter(A,B):-merger(A,C),sorter(C,B).
(afterlearning sorter(A,B):-recycle_memory(A,C), sorter(C,B). merger/2) sorter(A,B):-single_expr(A,C), single_expr(C,B). sorter/2 sorter(A,B):-parse_exprs(A,C),sorter(C,B).
(without sorter(A,B):-compare_nums(A,C), sorter(C,B). learning sorter(A,B):-drop_bag_remaining(A,C), sorter(C,B). merger/2) sorter(A,B):-recycle_memory(A,C), sorter(C,B). sorter(A,B):-single_expr(A,C), single_expr(C,B). Table 2: Metagol uses two meta-rules. P, Q, and R are existentially quantified O higher-ordervariablesandx,y,andz areuniversallyquantifiedfirst-ordervariables.
(cid:31)isatotalorderingconstraintovertheHerbrandbasetoguaranteethetermination of hypotheses. Name Meta-rule Orders Chain P(x,y)←Q(x,z),R(z,y) P (cid:31)Q,P (cid:31)R Tailrec P(x,y)←Q(x,z),P(z,y) P (cid:31)Q, x(cid:31)z(cid:31)y a recursive sorting algorithm based on a divide-and-conquer approach. The conventional implementation recursively splits an input sequence into units and performs mergingontheseunitstobuildupsortedsequencesthatareshorter.Theaforementioned variant takes an input sequence as a list of sub-sequences of length one and iteratively merges two sub-sequences in a bottom-up fashion. For human learners with little or no prior knowledge of recursive sorting algorithms, we consider that iterativealgorithmsareconceptuallyeasierteachingmaterialsinthecaseofunfamiliaritywithrecursiveprograms.Inaddition,weassumethathumansortingstrategies do not usually involve merging. Humans may learn to utilise merging for creative sorting strategies. A demonstration of the execution of the bottom-up merge sort algorithm is included in Example 1. To learn the bottom-up variant of merge sort1, we define the
1 Sourcecodeanddemosareavailableonhttps://github.com/LAi1997/sequential-teaching
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 9 worldstatethattherobotsorterwouldsee.Metagol isprovidedwithprimitivesto O manipulate expressions which compactly represent ordered sequences. Let Lt_expr representanon-emptymonotonicallyincreasingsequenceofintegersandbe defined as Lt_expr:= Int|Lt_expr<Lt_expr. Example 1 Let the sequence [4, 6, 5, 2, 3, 1] be an input to the bottom-up variant of merge sort. Merging is iteratively performed from the end of the list with lower indices. Merging take two expressions as inputs, e.g. 4 and 6, and outputs one expression, e.g. 4 < 6. In iteration 1, three merging would be executed on expressions
4 and6,5 and2,3 and1 whichwouldreturn[4 < 6, 2 < 5, 1 < 3].Initeration 2, onemergingwouldbeexecutedontwoleftmostexpressions4 < 6 and2 < 5 which wouldgive[2 < 4 < 5 < 6,1 < 3].Initeration 3,expressions2 < 4 < 5 < 6 and1
< 3 are merged which would return [1 < 2 < 3 < 4 < 5 < 6]. Only one expression remains which represents the sorted sequence and the algorithm terminates with [1
< 2 < 3 < 4 < 5 < 6] as output. ObjectsareseparatedintoprimitiveobjectsO andcompositeobjectsO prim comp where O = O ∪O denotes the set of all objects in the robot world. Each prim comp composite object is defined by primitive objects or other composite objects. S is a set of states and each state is a tuple of objects. In particular, a state is defined as a tuple (exprs,energy,left_bag,right_bag,memory) with an arity of 5. The exprs is a list of Lt_expr. The energy records the resource cost. The left_bag and right_bag are lists of the parsed numbers. The memory is a list of newly created Lt_expr.Anactiona∈Aisafunctionsuchthata:S →S.Eachactioniseithera primitive action included in A or a composite action included in A . Let A prim comp be an enumerable set of actions where A=A ∪A . Every composite action prim comp is constructed based on primitive actions or other composite actions. A resource function r : A×S → N defines the resources consumed by carrying out an action a∈A in state s∈S. Metagol ’s background knowledge is supplied with composite actions A = O comp
{parse_exprs/2, compare_nums/2, single_expr/2, drop_bag_remaining/2, recycle_memory/2} for learning merger/2 and sorter/2 in Table 1. Meta-rules in Table 2 allow Metagol to learn recursive programs. In merger/2, two Lt_expr O from exprs are first parsed into left_bag and right_bag. Then numbers are compared pair-wise from two bags and the smaller number is appended to the last Lt_expr in memory. sorter/2 applies merger/2 over all Lt_expr in exprs. Constructed Lt_expr in memory are recycled back to exprs by recycle_memory/2. This process is iterated until there is only one Lt_expr left in exprs and memory is empty. We define a cost function for compare_nums/2 such that the energy is incrementedbyonewhenevertwonumbersaresuccessfullycompared.Weadditionally define a constraint over the world states. This constraint based on Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient [87] ensures the expressions in the current state are not less sorted compared with expressions in the immediate next state.
3.3 Explanatory effect of curriculum order We have employed a quantifiable approach that provides operational definitions for the evaluation of the effect of sequential teaching on human comprehension. This allows us to better account for the context, results and limitations. We describe the
10 LunAietal. Table 3: A summary of the connections between definitions of comprehensibility, explanatory effects and cognitive window in [66,2] and the proposed framework to account for effects of sequential teaching curricula. Definitionsand Extendeddefinitionsand Framework resultsinpreviousworks resultsforsequentialteaching Comprehensibility Definitions1and2 Definitions5to7 Explanatoryeffects Definitions3and4 Definitions8and9 Cognitivewindow Definitions10to14,Remark1 Conjecture3 andConjecture1to2 basis of our framework by referring to previous work on comprehensibility [82] and explanatory effects [2] (Table 3). Then we define a sequential teaching curriculum anditsrelativeeffectivenesswithrespecttoanothersequentialteachingcurriculum. Based on an operable definition of comprehensibility [82], the authors in [2] explored the explanatory effects of machine-learned logic rules on human comprehension and proposed a framework of a cognitive window that focuses on the symbolic subsetofmachinelearning.Thedefinitionsofcomprehensibilityandexplanatoryeffects are extended in this present work to account for sequential teaching curricula inthecontextofsymbolicmachinelearning.Weusethelogicprogramslearnedfrom Metagol to generate explanations for our human trial. For the purpose of experiO mentation, we only consider curricula with noise-free training examples. This does not mean, however, that the proposed definitions could not be extended outside of the considered scope. Theoperationaldefinitionofcomprehensibility[82]isanobjectivemeansofevaluatinghumancomprehensionofaconceptbasedonhumanout-of-samplepredictive accuracy. It was extended in [2] to define the explanatory effectiveness of machinelearned logic programs which measures the extent to which examples with explanations generated from machine-learned logic programs can be simulated by humans. Definition 1 (Unaided human comprehension of examples, C (D, H, E)) h Given that D is a logic program representing the definition of a target predicate, H is a human group and E is a set of examples of the target predicate. The unaided human comprehension of examples E is the mean accuracy with which a human h ∈ H after a brief study of E and without further sight can classify new material sampled randomly from the domain of D. Compared with the unaided human comprehension of examples, the machineexplained human comprehension of examples corresponds to the out-of-sample classification accuracy after studying the machine-learned explanation M(E) where M is a machine learning algorithm and E is a set of training examples. Definition 2 (Machine-explainedhumancomprehensionofexamples,C ( ex D,H,M(E))):GiventhatDisalogicprogramrepresentingthedefinitionofatarget predicate, H is a human group, M(E) is a theory learned using machine learning
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 11 algorithm M and E is a set of examples of the target predicate. The machineexplained human comprehension of examples E is the mean accuracy with which a human h ∈ H after a brief study of an explanation based on M(E) and without further sight can classify new material sampled randomly from the domain of D. The explanatory effect of a machine-learned theory on human comprehension of a task is defined as the difference between machine-explain and unaided human comprehension of examples of the task. Definition 3 (Explanatory effect of a machine-learned theory, E (D, H, ex M(E))): Given a logic program D representing the definition of a target predicate, a human group H and a machine learning algorithm M, the explanatory effect of the theory M(E) learned from examples E is E (D,H,M(E))=C (D,H,M(E))−C (D,H,E) ex ex h Inthecasethattheexplanationsprovidedbythemachineleadtoapositiveimprovement,theexplanatoryeffectofthelearnedtheoryisbeneficialtohumancomprehension.Whenthisdifferenceisnegative,theexplanatoryeffectofthemachine-learned theory is harmful to human comprehension. Definition 4 (Beneficial/harmfuleffectofamachine-learnedtheory):Given a logic program D representing the definition of a target predicate, a set of training examples E, a group of humans H, and a symbolic machine learning algorithm M:
– M(E) learned from E is beneficial to H if E (D,H,M(E))>0 ex
– M(E) learned from E is harmful to H if E (D,H,M(E))<0 ex
– Otherwise, M(E) learned from E does not have an effect on H Whether or not an explanatory effect is significantly beneficial or harmful can be determined empirically by applying an independent two-sample t-test or similar method to the means of unaided- and machine-explained human comprehension. In thecasethatthemeandifferenceisnotsignificant,wecannotclassifytheeffectofa machine-learned theory as either beneficial or harmful. The definitions of human comprehension and explanatory effects are extended to account for the ordering of concepts. We define a sequential teaching curriculum to contain a set of concept definitions, sets of examples and explanations. The arrangementofconceptsinacurriculumcanbedecidedbasedonanorderingfunction which outputs a score to rank concepts. Definition 5 (Curriculumrankfunction,λ(D,E,M))Givenasetofpredicate definitions Ds, sets of examples Es and a set of machine learning algorithms Ms,
λ:Ds×Es×Ms→Nisarankfunctionthatreturnstherankvalueofanypredicate definition D∈Ds in a curriculum. A sequential teaching curriculum contains “chunks” of teaching material and a curriculumhasatleastonesuch“chunk”.Theorderofconceptsreceivedbyhumans is determined by a defined rank function which assigns a score to every block of teachingmaterialwhichcontainstheconceptdefinitions,examplesandexplanations.
12 LunAietal. Definition 6 (Sequential teaching curriculum, ST(Ds, Es, λ, Ms)): Given that Ds = {D ,D , ... D } is a set of predicate definitions of size n, Es = {E ,E ,
1 2 n 1 2
..., E } contains sets of examples where E are examples of D for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, Ms n i i denotes a set of machine learning algorithms and λ:Ds×Es×Ms→N is a rank function, a sequential teaching curriculum ST(Ds, Es λ, Ms) is an enumerable set of tuples {(R ,D ,E ,M ),(R ,D ,E ,M ),...,(R ,D ,E ,M )} in which R =
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 n n n n j
λ(D ,E ,M )istherankofaconceptinthecurriculumfor1≤j ≤n.Asequential j j j teaching curriculum enumerates concepts with respect to increasing rank value. Humancomprehensionisconsideredaidedbyexplanationsifthemachine-learned logicprograminateachingmaterialblockisnotempty.Otherwise,humancomprehension is established based on training examples alone. We proceed to define the effectofasequentialteachingcurriculumonthehumancomprehensionofaconcept. Definition 7 (Humancomprehensionofexamplesinasequentialteaching curriculum, C (T,H)):GiventhatT =ST(Ds,Es,λ,Ms)isasequentialteachseq ing curriculum whereDsis asetof n predicate definitions,Esare sets ofexamples,
λ:Ds×Es×Ms→Nisarankfunction,Msisasetofmachinelearningalgorithms and H is a human group, the human comprehension of examples in the sequential teaching curriculum is
 (cid:12) 
 (cid:12) (cid:12) τ =C h (D i ,H,E i ), M i (E i )=∅  C (T,H)= (R ,τ)(cid:12) τ =C (D ,H,M (E )), M (E )6=∅ seq i (cid:12) ex i i i i i
 (cid:12)
(cid:12) for (R i ,D i ,E i ,M i )∈S,1≤i≤n
 Weprovideexamplesofsequentialteachingdefinitionwhichspecifyacurriculum that presents training materials of merging before introducing training materials of sorting and a curriculum with the reverse order of teaching. Example 2 Let Ds = {merger,sorter} denote predicate definitions of merging and mergesort,E andE betherespectiveexamplesetsandEs={E ,E } merge sort merge sort andMs={Metagol }whichgeneratesexplanations.Wedefineλ (merger, O merge/sort E ,Metagol )=0andλ (sorter,E ,Metagol )=1.Letλ merge O merge/sort sort O sort/merge
(merger, E , Metagol ) = 1 and λ (sorter, E , Metagol ) = 0. merge O sort/mergel sort O Themerge-then-sortcurriculumisrepresentedbyST(Ds,Es,λ ,Ms)which merge/sort teaches merging before teaching sorting and the sort-then-merge curriculum is denoted by ST(Ds, Es, λ ,Ms) which teaches sorting before teaching mergsort/merge ing. λ specifies the ordering of concepts in the merge-then-sort curriculum merge/sort ST(Ds,Es,λ ,Ms)andλ definestheorderingofconceptsinthe merge/sort sort/merge sort-then-merge curriculum ST(Ds, Es, λ , Ms). sort/merge Definition 8 (Effect of a sequential teaching curriculum, E (C , C , D)): seq 1 2 C = C (ST(Ds, Es, λ , Ms), H) and C = C (ST(Ds, Es, λ , Ms), H) are
1 seq 1 2 seq 2 sequentialteachingcurriculawhereDsisasetofnpredicatedefinitionsandD∈Ds isapredicatedefinition,Es={E,...}aresetsofexamples,λ ,λ :Ds×Es×Ms→
1 2 N are two rank functions, Ms is a set of machine learning algorithms and H is a human group. R = λ (D,E,M ) and R = λ (D,E,M ) are the ranks of D
1 1 1 2 2 2
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 13 in C and C where M ,M ∈ Ms. The explanatory effect of curriculum C over
1 2 1 2 1 curriculum C on predicate definition D is
2 E (C ,C ,D)=τ −τ seq 1 2 1 2 where (R ,τ )∈C , (R ,τ )∈C .
1 1 1 2 2 2 In Definition 7, comprehension measurements are obtained with respect to the ranking of concepts in a sequential teaching curriculum. The effect of a sequential teachingcurriculumreflectsthedegreetowhichhumancomprehensionofaconcept is affected by a curriculum. Given two sequential teaching curricula and a concept of interest, the effect of one curriculum over another curriculum corresponds to the difference in comprehension measurements of the concept. A significant difference in human comprehension as a result of learning from one curriculum over another curriculum can be classified as a beneficial or harmful effect of learning from the former curriculum. Definition 9 (Beneficial/harmful effect of a sequential teaching curriculum): Given that C = C (ST(Ds, Es, λ , Ms), H) and C = C (ST(Ds,
1 seq 1 2 seq Es, λ , Ms), H) are sequential teaching curricula where Ds is a set of n pred2 icate definitions and D ∈ Ds is a predicate definition, Es are sets of examples,
λ ,λ :Ds×Es×Ms→N are two rank functions, Ms is a set of machine learning
1 2 algorithms, and H is a human group, the curriculum C in comparison with the
1 curriculum C is
2
– beneficial to H on D if E (C ,C ,D)>0 seq 1 2
– harmful to H on D if E (C ,C ,D)<0 seq 1 2
– Otherwise there is no effect on H for D in curriculum C compared with cur1 riculum C
2 The effect on the predicate D is beneficial when the curriculum ordered by λ
1 resultsinabettercomprehensionofDthanthecomprehensionofDinthecurriculum ordered by λ . Conversely, the effect on D is harmful in the case that significant
2 degradation of comprehension is observed when comparing the comprehension of D between curricula described by λ and λ . As with the effect of a machine-learned
1 2 theory (Definition 4), whether or not an effect of a sequential teaching curriculum is significantly beneficial or harmful can be determined using an independent twosample t-test or similar method.
3.4 Cognitive cost of a logic program Aconsensusbetweentheliteratureoncognitivepsychologyandartificialintelligence
[61,45,69] is that the information processing of humans in working memory can be modelled by manipulation of symbols in machines which can be formally captured by Turing machines. The limitation on working memory capacity corresponds to a boundedtapelengthandinstructioncomplexityinTuringMachines.Forrule-based concept acquisition [21], human concept attainment is analogical to a search in a collection of hypotheses guided by some preference ordering which is comparable to versionspacelearninginmachinelearning[64].Inaddition,theorganisationofcomplex action sequences into hierarchical structures in human information processing
14 LunAietal. is an efficient mechanism for general problem-solving. In the contexts of analogical problem-solving[23]andproductionsystems[69],top-levelgoalsaredecomposedinto sub-goals which can be described by a set of rules that guide actions in problemsolving sequences. Although rules generally can be considered as procedural knowledge, in complex domains human verbalisation of rules utilises declarative memory
[7,81]. The explicit representations of a human problem-solving solution correspond to rule-like descriptions. For the following definitions, we assume that:
– Humanlearnersareversionspacelearnerswhocanmakeonlylimitedhypothesis space searches
– Human learning is guided by meta-rules which construct the sub-goal structure and uses predicates as background knowledge
– An increase in the execution complexity of the problem solution can have a negative effect on performance
– Rules can be declaratively represented in a verbalisable form whose complexity can be measured by the Kolmogorov complexity ThecognitivecostisavariantofKolmogorovcomplexity[49]proposedin[2].The cognitivecostestimatesthetextualcomplexityoflogictermsandatomsdeclaredin the execution stack of working memory. These logic terms and atoms are instances of predicates in a datalog program during the execution of a goal. A datalog program is a declarative subset of logic programs that represent data structures using predicate arguments but do not use function symbols. Given logic terms and atoms T ,T ,...,T ,T , a tuple of finite arity can represented as
1 2 n−1 n tuple(T ,tuple(T ,tuple(...,tuple(T ,tuple(T ,(cid:15)))...)))
1 2 n−1 n Similarly, a list of finite size can be represented as list(T ,list(T ,list(...,list(T ,list(T ,(cid:15)))...)))
1 2 n−1 n where(cid:15)denotesanemptycharacter.Thecostoflogictermsandatomsiscomputed based on the length of the representation, in particular, the number of symbols involved. Definition 10 (Cognitive cost of a logic term and atom, C(T)): Given T a logic term or atom, the cost of C(T) can be computed as follows:
– C(>)=C(⊥)=1
– A variable V has cost C(V)=1
– A constant c of a finite length has cost C(c) which is the number of digits and characters in c
– An atom Q(T ,T ,...) of a finite arity has cost C(Q(T ,T ,...)) = 1+C(T )+
1 2 1 2 1 C(T )+ ...
2 Example 3 An atom list(1,list(0,(cid:15))) which represents a list [1, 0] has a cognitive cost C(list(1,list(0,(cid:15))))=5. Example 4 An atom merger(State1,State2) with variables State1 and State2 has a cognitive cost C(merger(State1,State2))=3. In the event of a query q, an execution stack resembles the mental computation and represents the memory of grounded logic terms and atoms instantiated.
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 15 Definition 11 (Execution stack of a datalog program, S(P,l,q)): Given a query q and a non-negative integer l, the execution stack S(P,l,q) of a datalog program P is a finite set of size l of atoms or terms evaluated during the execution of P to compute an answer for q. An evaluation in which an answer to the query is found ends with value >, and an evaluation in which no answer to the query is found ends with ⊥. The cognitive cost represents the tax of memorising goals in the human shortterm memory. The effort of maintaining goals in working memory correlates to the performance of human problem-solving [24]. The complexity of executing a set of rules is estimated by the sum of the cognitive cost of logic terms and atoms in the execution stack. The depth bound of an execution stack denotes the limitation of working memory and ensures the computation of the sum of cognitive costs halts. Definition 12 (Cognitive cost of a datalog program, Cog(P,q)): Given a query q, a non-negative integer l, the cognitive cost of a datalog program P is X Cog(P,q)= C(t) t∈S(P,l,q) Example 5 The program merger/2 in Table 1 takes two input Lt_expr expressions in the expression list of a world state and produces an expression Lt_expr in the memory of the output world state. The output expression contains integers of increasing magnitude from left to right connected by the “<” symbol. Given ex = list(1,list(0,(cid:15))), lb = (cid:15), rb = (cid:15) and m = (cid:15), s = tuple(ex , tuple(0,
1 1 1 1 1 1 tuple(lb ,tuple(rb ,m )))) denotes the initial world state and C(s ) = 13. Let ex
1 1 1 1 2
= list((cid:15), (cid:15)), lb = list(1,(cid:15)), rb = list(0, (cid:15)) and m = (cid:15). s = tuple(ex , tuple(0,
2 2 2 2 2 tuple(lb ,tuple(rb ,m ))))denotestheworldstateafterexecutingparse_expr/2and
2 2 2 C(s ) = 15. parse_expr/2 takes two expressions from the expression list and puts
2 oneexpressionintotheleftbagandputstheotherintotherightbag.LetV andV be
1 2 variables.ThelengthoftheexecutionstackdenotedbyS(merger,4,merger(s1,V ))
1 is4.Thecognitivecostofexecutingmerger/2giventhequerymerger(s ,V )is60.
1 1 S(merger,4,merger(s1,V1)) C(T) merger(s1,V1) 15 parse_expr(s1,V2) 15 parse_expr(s1,s2) 29
⊥ 1 Cog(merger,merger(s1,V1)) 60 In human problem solving, the role of background knowledge is to facilitate the transferofexistingsolutions[8,70]tothecurrentcontext.Inthecasethatauxiliary knowledge is absent, the construction of the solution relies on lower-level sub-goals andperformanceislimitedbyhumanoperationalerror.Aprimitiveproblemsolution thusdenotesaprogramthatinvolvestheminimumamountofbackgroundknowledge of the task. Definition 13 (Minimum primitive solution program, M¯(φ,E)):Givenaset ofprimitivesφandexamplesE,adatalogprogramlearnedfromexamplesE usinga symbolicmachinelearningalgorithmM¯ andasetofprimitivesφ0 ⊆φisaminimum
16 LunAietal. primitive solution program M¯(φ,E) if and only if for all sets of primitives φ00 ⊆ φ where|φ00|<|φ0|andforallsymbolicmachinelearningalgorithmM0 usingφ00,there exists no machine-learned program M0(E) that is consistent with examples E. Definition 14 (Cognitivecostofaproblemsolution,CogP(E,M¯,φ,q)):Given examplesE,primitivesetφ,aqueryqandasymbolicmachinelearningalgorithmM¯ thatlearnsaminimumprimitivesolution,thecognitivecostofaproblemsolutionis CogP(E,M¯,φ,q)=Cog(M¯(φ,E),q) where M¯(φ,E) is a minimum primitive solution program. The presence of informative knowledge enables efficient problem-solving as projections from background knowledge and allows shortcuts in the construction of the current solution process. In comparison with a primitive problem solution, executional shortcuts in a non-primitive solution could lead to less cognitive load on workingmemoryandfewerperformanceerrorsduringtheexecutionofthesolution.
3.5 Conjectures of human comprehension DonaldMichie[58]discussedtheeffectoftherepresentationalandexecutionalcostof aprogramonhumanunderstanding.Hedescribedthenotionofahumanwindowin termsofaclassofprogramswiththerightbalanceofstorageandcomputationalcomplexity that are fit for human understanding. The cognitive window framework [2] sharesMichie’sviewofthehumanwindowanddescribestwoconstraintsofmachinelearnedtheoryinregardtoitseffectsonhumancomprehension.Thefirstconstraint relates to the size of the hypothesis space associated with the representation of a machine-learned logic theory. This constraint specifies the limitation of human search in the hypothesis space. Conjecture 1 (Cognitive bound on the hypothesis space size, B(P,H)):Consider a symbolic machine-learned datalog program P using p predicate symbols and m meta-rules each having at most j body literals. Given a group of humans H, B(P,H) is a population-dependent bound on the size of hypothesis space such that at most n clauses in P can be comprehended by all humans in H and B(P,H) = mnp(1+j)n. TheconjectureofthehumansearchablehypothesisspacesizeB(P,H)relatesto the MIL complexity analysis in [28,53]. The authors in [2] demonstrated empirical evidence which supports Conjecture 1. Humans learned can only learn some of the rulesforatwo-playerssimplegamewhenthedescriptivesizeoftherulesishigh.This implies that the hypothesis space associated with the program class is too large for acompletesearchandimposesahighcognitiveloadonworkingmemory.Sinceonly a fraction of the original rules is learned, problem solutions which produce action sequences are not complete and errors become more likely to occur. The cognitive window conjecture describes that a machine-learned theory has a harmful explanatory effect on comprehension when learning requires a search in a hypothesis space that is too large for working memory to manage. In addition, a machine-learnedtheoryhasnobeneficialexplanatoryeffectifitscognitivecomplexity in executing explained knowledge is not lower than the cognitive complexity of a solution that uses less auxiliary knowledge.
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 17 Conjecture 2 (Cognitive window of a machine-learned theory):Givenalogic program D representing the definition of a target predicate, a machine learning algorithm M, a minimum primitive solution learning algorithm M¯ and examples E, M(E) is a machine-learned theory using the primitive set φ and belongs to the program class with hypothesis space S. For a human group H, E satisfies both ex
1. E (D,H,M(E)) < 0 if |S| > B(M(E),H) ex
2. E (D,H,M(E)) ≤ 0 if Cog(M(E),x) ≥ CogP(E,M¯,φ,x) for all unseen ex query x that h∈H have to perform after study Explanations are only beneficial if they are of appropriate complexity and are not overwhelming nor more cognitively expensive than a primitive solution to the problem.Thiscognitivewindowsuggeststhatcomplexmachine-learnedmodelsand models which cannot provide abstract descriptions are difficult to be comprehended by humans effectively. Remark 1 Metagol isprovidedwithasetofcompositepredicatedefinitionsA = O comp
{parse_exprs/2,compare_nums/2,single_expr/2,drop_bag_remaining/2, recycle_memory/2} to learn merger/2 in Table 1. A is constructed from a comp set of primitive action definitions A . The composite actions of breaking numprim ber sequences into individual numbers (parse_exprs/2), comparing two numbers
(compare_nums/2)andappendingtwosortedsequences(drop_bag_remaining/2) are sufficient for merging and the respective predicates appear in the learned logic program merger/2. Given action definitions A = A ∪A , since composite prim comp actions A are constructed from multiple primitive actions from A , A comp prim comp is the necessary and sufficient subset of A to learn a definition of merging. This implies that merger/2 learned by Metagol (E) is the minimum primitive solution. O Therefore, given test examples X of merging and sufficient training examples E, Cog(merger, x) = CogP(E, Metagol , A, x) for all x∈X. O The complexity analysis based on the Blumer bound [17] in [29] attributes a sample complexity decrease to the introduction of new predicate symbols to the machine learner. Previously learned predicate definitions extend the background. Reusinglearnedconceptsleadstoadecreaseinthesizeofthetargethypothesisand areductioninthesizeofthehypothesisspacewhichimproveslearningperformance
[29]. Based on our assumptions in Section 3.4, we consider an analogy between the humanreusingofpreviouslylearnedconceptsandtheintroductionofpredicatedefinitions into a new learning context. By referring to Definition 9, we attribute a beneficial effect of a curriculum on human comprehension over another curriculum to an improvement in the sample complexity based on the analysis in [29]. Conjecture 3 (Sequential teaching curriculum improvement):C =C (ST(
1 seq Ds,Es,λ ,Ms),H)andC =C (ST(Ds,Es,λ ,Ms),H)aresequentialteaching
1 2 seq 2 curricula where Ds is a set of n predicate definitions and D ∈ Ds is a predicate definition, Es are sets of examples, λ ,λ :Ds×Es×Ms→N are rank functions,
1 2 MsisasetofmachinelearningalgorithmsandH isahumangroup.R ,R denote
1 2 ranks of D such that (R ,D) ∈ C and (R ,D) ∈ C . For 1 ≤ i ≤ n such that
1 1 2 2
(R ,D )∈C and R <R , let p denote the sum of the number of predicates in D i i 1 i 1 i andubetheminimumnumberofclausestoexpressD usingD .For1≤j ≤nsuch i that(R ,D )∈C andR <R ,letp+cdenotethenumberofpredicatesinD and j j 2 j 2 j
18 LunAietal. u+kbetheminimumnumberofclausestoexpressDusingD .E (C ,C ,D)>0 j seq 1 2 when: uln(p)<(u+k)ln(p+c) Given a target predicate D and a fixed human search bound B(D,H) for a human groupH,humanlearnersaremorelikelytofindDifthehypothesisspaceassociated becomes smaller as a result of learning new knowledge prior to learning D. For a fixed set of training examples in two curricula, a reduction in sample complexity correlates to a decrease in predictive error and an improvement in performance.
4 Experimental framework In previous works [2,66], human comprehension was measured by the accuracy withwhichparticipantsansweredclassificationquestions.Theaccuracyofproblemsolvingperformanceforclassificationtasksandsequentialdecision-makingtaskscan be different due to the nature of the operations involved. In this section, we present our approach to evaluating human sorting performance based on statistics and describe our experimental hypotheses in relation to the theoretical framework.
4.1 Evaluating human comprehension of sorting For merging and sorting, human comprehension corresponds to the competence of participantstoarrangeitemswithrespecttothetotalorderingoftheitems.Decisions related to the arrangement of items are reflected by the classification of items into respectivepositionsinthesequence.Whiletheout-of-sampleclassificationaccuracy is an objective measure of human comprehension for classification tasks, it does not estimate the error of sequential predictions. Although alternative metrics exist, we useSpearman’srankcorrelationcoefficient[87]asameanstoassesstheerrorbetween theexpectedsequenceandtheactualsequenceprovidedbyaparticipant.Spearman’s rankcorrelationcoefficientisanon-parametricrankcorrelationtestandindicatesthe degree of monotonic ordering between two variables. Given two sequences of values representingsamplesoftwovariables,whenSpearman’srankcorrelationcoefficientis
+1or−1,itmeansthevariablesareperfectlymonotonicfunctionsofeachother.On theotherhand,whenSpearman’srankcorrelationcoefficienttendsto0,itindicates there is no monotonic relationship between the two variables. We use Spearman’s rankcorrelationcoefficienttoexaminetheextentofmonotonicalignmentbetweena sequence of integers that has been provided by a human and the correctly arranged sequence produced by a machine algorithm. In addition, we take into consideration the possibility that participants provide incorrect answers that are inversely sorted with respect to the order specified in the experiment instructions. In this case, a coefficient score tending to −1 would mean that the participant successfully managed to sort the sequence but forgot the specified ordering. In the experiment trials, we found that such answers rarely occurred. However, in order to avoid diluting the significance of results due to the inclusionofnegativecoefficients,wedefinethefollowingfunctiontodiscountnegative coefficients and normalise all of them into the interval [0, 1].
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 19 Table4:Weconsidertwoindependentexperimentalvariables.Theorderofconcepts in the curriculum (CO) is varied between learning merging before learning sorting
(MS) and learning sorting before learning merging (SM). The presence of explanations generated from machine-learned rules (EX) alters between learning with explanations (WEX) and learning without explanations (WOEX). The performance score of human participants (PS) is the dependent experimental variable. Variablename Variabletype Treatmentabbreviations Curriculumorder(CO) Independentvariable MS,SM Presenceofexplanations(EX) Independentvariable WEX,WOEX Performancescore(PS) Dependentvariable – Definition 15 (Normalised performance score, perf(R ,R )) Given two sets h m ofintegersR andR ,adefineddiscountingconstant0<c<1andtheSpearman’s h m rank correlation coefficient ρ, the normalised performance score is defined as
(
ρ(R ,R ), ρ(R ,R )≥0 perf(R ,R )= h m h m h m
|ρ(R ,R )|·c, ρ(R ,R )<0 h m h m Example 6 shows the performance evaluation of two unordered sequences by comparing them to a sorted sequence. Example 6 Let R denote the sequence [4, 6, 5, 2, 3, 1], R denote the sequence h1 h2
[1,2,6,3,4,5] andR betheperfectlymonotonicsequence[1,2,3,4,5,6] sorted m byamachineprogram.ComparedwithR ,R hasonlyonenumberthatisoutof m h2 place.However,R isalmostasequencewithdecreasingmagnitudewithnumbers2 h1 and4misplaced.GivenR isamonotonicallyincreasingsequence,R alignsbetter m h2 with the machine output R and perf(R ,R )=.386 < perf(R ,R )=.657. m h1 m h2 m The Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient lies in the interval [-1, 1] and the absolute value of the negative coefficient is multiplied by a discounting constant. Based on results from multiple trials, the discounting constant c is set to .5 to moderately penalise responses that involve reversed sorted sequences.
4.2 Experimental hypotheses Wedefineourexperimentalhypothesesinthissection.Table4showstheexperimentalvariablesandtreatments.Weexaminetheeffectofthecurriculumorder(CO)via twoteachingarrangements:a)learningmergingbeforelearningsorting(MS)andb) learningsortingbeforelearningmerging(SM).Inaddition,weassesstheeffectofthe presence of explanations (EX) in two environments: a) learning with explanations of merging (WEX) b) learning without explanations of merging (WOEX).
20 LunAietal. Table5:Definitionsoftherankfunctions.IncurriculaMS/WEXandMS/WOEX, humans learn merging before learning sorting. In curricula SM/WEX and SM/WOEX, humans learn sorting before learning merging. The rank functions of MS assign a lower rank value to merging. The rank functions of SM assign a lower rank value to sorting. In curricula MS/WEX and SM/WEX, explanations about merging are generated from Metagol . O Curriculaabbreviation Rankfunctiondefinitions MS/WEX λ MS/WEX
(merger,Emerge,MetagolO)=0
λ MS/WEX
(sorter,Esort,∅)=1 MS/WOEX λ MS/WOEX
(merger,Emerge,∅)=0
λ MS/WOEX
(sorter,Esort,∅)=1 SM/WEX λ SM/WEX
(merger,Emerge,MetagolO)=1
λ SM/WEX
(sorter,Esort,∅)=0 SM/WOEX λ SM/WOEX
(merger,Emerge,∅)=1
λ SM/WOEX
(sorter,Esort,∅)=0 Explanations are not provided for learning sorting to avoid introducing merge prematurely in the curricula that learn sorting before learning merging. We use the normalised performance score perf in Definition 15 to measure both human performances of merging and sorting (PS). Let Ds = {merger,sorter} denote target theories of merging and sorting. Let Es={E ,E } where E denotes a sufficient set of examples for learning merge sort merge thetargettheoryofmergingandE isasufficientsetofexamplesforlearningthe sort target theory of sorting. Both human learners and Metagol are provided with the O same sets of examples Es. Let Ms = {Metagol ,∅} denote the machine learning O algorithmsusedtolearnrulesforgeneratingexplanationsand∅isanemptyprogram. H stands for a human group. The rank functions for curricula that learn merging beforelearningsortingaredefinedasλ andλ .Therankfunctions MS/WEX MS/WOEX ofcurriculathatlearnmergingbeforelearningsortingaredefinedasλ and SM/WEX
λ . The definitions of the rank functions are summarised in Table 5. SM/WOEX Let C = C (ST(Ds, Es, λ , Ms), H) denote the human MS/WEX seq MS/WEX comprehension of the sequential teaching curriculum that learns merging before learning sorting with explanations of merging. Let C = C (ST(Ds, Es, MS/WOEX seq
λ , Ms), H) denote the human comprehension of the sequential teachMS/WOEX ing curriculum that learns merging before learning sorting without explanations of merging. Let C = C (ST(Ds,Es, λ , Ms), H) denote the huSM/WEX seq SM/WEX man comprehension of the sequential teaching curriculum that learns sorting before learningmergingwithexplanationsofmerging.LetC =C (ST(Ds,Es, SM/WOEX seq
λ , Ms), H) denote the human comprehension of the sequential teachSM/WOEX ing curriculum that learns sorting before learning merging without explanations of merging.Wethenintroducehypothesesthatfocusonhowcurriculumorderandexplanationsgeneratedfrommachine-learnedrulesaffecthumanlearningofsorting.In
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 21 Table 6: A summary of experimental independent variables, definitions and results related to each experimental hypothesis. Hypotheses Independentexperimentalvariables Relateddefinitions H1 CO H2 EX Definition5to9,15andConjecture3 H3 COandEX H4 EX Definition1to4,15andConjecture2 H5 EX Definition15 Table6,weshowhowthefollowingexperimentalhypothesesrelatetotheconjectures and our framework. H1: Learning merging before learning sorting leads to a beneficial effect on human comprehension of sorting (E (C , C , sorter) + E ( seq MS/WEX SM/WEX seq C , C , sorter) > 0) with respect to learning sorting before MS/WOEX SM/WOEX learning merging. In H1, we examine whether human learners achieve better sorting performance from the curriculum with increasing concept complexity (MS) than from the curriculum with decreasing concept complexity (SM). H2: Learning merging with explanations results in a beneficial explanatory effect on human comprehension of sorting (E (C , C ,sorter) + seq MS/WEX MS/WOEX E (C , C ,sorter) > 0) with respect to learning merging seq SM/WEX SM/WOEX without explanations. In H2, we assess if learning merging with aids in the form of explanations constructed from machine-learned rules (WEX) improves sorting performance compared with learning merging without explanations (WOEX). H3:Learningmergingwithexplanationsfurtherincreasesthebeneficialeffectofcurriculumorderonhumancomprehensionofsorting(E (C ,C , seq MS/WEX MS/WOEX sorter) - E (C , C , sorter) > 0) with respect to learning seq SM/WEX SM/WOEX merging without explanations. InH3,weinspectifthereisaninteractioneffectbetweencurriculumorder(CO) and explanations (EX) on sorting performance. We suspect that for human learners who have no previous programming experience,learningmerginginthepresenceofexplanationsresultsinadaptingnewsorting strategiesincomparisonwithlearningmergingintheabsenceofexplanations.Since mergingcanbetaughtinisolationanditdoesnotdependontheknowledgeofsorting in the curricula, we refer to Definition 4 and the cognitive window to account
22 LunAietal. for the effect of explanations on merging. However, owing to Metagol learning a O minimum primitive solution merger/2, we anticipate no beneficial effect on human comprehensionofmergingasaresultoflearningfromexplanations.LetAdenotethe backgroundknowledgeofMetagol containingdefinitionsofprimitiveandcomposO ite actions and X denote questions that the human group H performs in the merge performance test. H4:Learningmergingwithexplanationsgeneratedfromruleswithoutalowcognitive cost (Cog(merger,x) ≥ CogP(E , Metagol , A, x) for all x ∈ X) does merge O notresultinabeneficialexplanatoryeffectonhumancomprehensionofmerging
(E (merger, H, merger) ≤0). ex In H4, we examine if learning with explanations of merging (WEX) results in no observable performance difference or worse performance with respect to learning without explanations of merging (WOEX). H5: Learning merging with explanations before learning sorting leads to adaptation of efficient human sorting strategies with better performance. We consider executed comparisons of human participants as problem-solving traces. In Section 5.4, we estimate through human trace analysis the correspondence between human sorting strategies and machine sorting algorithms in training and performance tests. An underlying assumption is that learning a new strategy duringtheperformancetestischallengingwithoutfeedbackandstrategyadaptation iseasierduringthetrainingstage.Inaddition,weassumethatthepresenceofexplanations and the incremental curriculum contribute to efficient and effective human decision-making. Therefore, in H5, we inspect the performance of specific sorting strategies that increase in usage from sort training to sort performance test.
5 Experiments Wefirstdescribetheimplementationofapre-testwhichwasgiventoallparticipants at the beginning of the experiment. In addition, we report the masking and presentation of the sorting task in Section 5.2. In Section 5.3, we explain the setup of the experimentwhichwascarriedoutonacrowdsourcingplatformAmazonMechanical Turk. Results are demonstrated in Section 5.4 which is followed by a discussion of our findings.
5.1 MaRs-IB pre-test We have reason to assume that the participant’s performance in the experimental task varies depending on their cognitive abilities. Recording their cognitive ability provides us with two possibilities:
1. It allows statistical control of the participants’ cognitive ability.
2. Itcanbedeterminedwhetherthemeancognitiveabilityinallexperimentalconditions is the same. If that is the case, mean differences in performance between theconditionscanbeinterpretedwithouthavingtocontrolforeachparticipant’s cognitive ability first.
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 23 Therehavebeentwomajorsuggestionsforrecordingthiscontrol:eitherconfront participants with a version of the experimental task itself or use a short intelligence testintheformofaRavenMatricesshorttest[12]orsimilarmaterial.Wearguethat usingtheexperimentaltaskwillunderminethesequentialnatureofourexperiment, aseithergroupwouldstartwiththelow-complexitytaskorwiththehigh-complexity task. A third option is for each group to start with their respective first task, which would introduce task familiarity effects (the high-complexity-first condition would havecompletedmorehigh-complexitytasksthanthelow-complexity-firstcondition). This approach does not pose a good control since each group would complete a different task. Fig. 2: Each MaRs-IB item consists of an incomplete 3×3 matrix in which 8 cells withshapediconsdepictamodificationruleto(an)abstractshape(s).Thetestasks the participant to fill in the missing piece at the right bottom corner of the 3×3 matrixbychoosingoneoffourprovidedoptions(A,B,CandD).Thecorrectanswer to this example is A. Using an intelligence test avoids interference with the experiment since the test should not influence strategy development in the experimental task in a way that couldbeconsideredtoworkagainstthesequentialorderoftheexperiment.However, theoriginalRavenMatricestestandmanycomparabletestsareexpensiveandcannot bedigitizedduetocopyright.Thematrixreasoningitembank(MaRs-IB)hasneither of these two issues [26], thus making it an appropriate candidate for establishing a measure of intelligence in an online experiment. In addition, the authors of the MaRs-IB test set reported acceptable internal consistency and convergent validity, and reasonable test-retest reliability [26]. Although there is no normalized score which would be comparable to the IQ, the MaRs-IB test can serve as a measure of the relative cognitive ability of participants. Another concern regards the open accesstothematerial[26]andfamiliaritywiththetestfromotherstudies.Thisrisk can be mitigated by randomised arrangement and the selection of items from the multiple test sets provided by the authors.
24 LunAietal. Application The authors [26] provided three sets of 80 items (Figure 2). Each of these sets uses different symbols and is available in three further variations though colour-visiondeficientsubjectswereinformednottoparticipate.Thetestingproceduredescribed in the validation paper [26] will be consistently completed in under 10 minutes (8 minutes test and a series of practice items beforehand) and is thus applicable for our use case. Participants will train on 10 practice items until they completed three of them correctly. An item in the full test starts with a 500 milliseconds fixation cross, followed by a 100 milliseconds white screen mask [26]. The matrix will then be displayed for 30 seconds, or until the participant responded (whichever happens earlier). After 25 seconds a clock indicates that participants have 5 seconds left for this specific item [26]. Participants complete these items for a total of 8 minutes. The accuracy with which the participant chooses the correct missing pattern in the given time frame is considered the measurement of pre-test performance.
5.2 Materials The arrangement of objects arguably makes up a great proportion of human daily tasks. This implies a high familiarity of human participants with the task of sorting. The preferred sorting approaches of humans with no background knowledge in programming could resemble some sorting algorithms. However, we assume that learning recursive algorithms such as merge sort without a well-defined curriculum demands a great effort and applying such algorithms efficiently is challenging. Problem masking Inordertopreventparticipantsfromrelyingonthetotalorderingofnaturalnumbers, wedesignedanisomorphicproblemthatrepresentedintegersequencesbytheweights of fruits in piles. Numbers were masked by visual icons of fruits and the numeric values were hidden from participants. A balance scale mechanism (Figure 3) was introducedtoallowparticipantstocomparetheweightsbetweentwofruitsandacted asaninstrumentforconstructingthetotalorderingofthenumbers.Theimmediate access to the total ordering of natural numbers was prevented and participants had toestablishitthemselves.Thissetupwasusedforteachingbothmergingandsorting. Asolutionofthissetupcorrespondedtoasolutionofmergingandsortingasequence of numbers without changing the underlying solution structure. According to the definition of isomorphic problems [86], the new fruit weighing problemsareisomorphictotherespectiveproblemsformergingandsortingnumbers. Such isomorphic translations only affect the initial stage of problem-solving while attempting to recognise a useful analogy via analogical access but do not hinder problem-solving via analogical inference if an analogy for the problem has been consciously recognized [38,44,74]. Owing to the difficulty of immediately recalling past experiences of merging and sorting, we anticipated that participants would initially perform less optimal merging and sorting strategies and there would be more potential for performance improvement later. Forthetrainingandperformancetestofmergingandsorting,werandomlysampled sequences of various lengths to provide a spectrum of problem difficulty. For
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching
25 Fig.3:Participantswereaskedtodistinguishbetweentwoalternativechoicesbyusingtheprovidedbalancescaleandsubmitthecorrect sequence by pressing a button to the right.
26 LunAietal. Fig. 4: On the top row, the visualisations show the comparison result (fruits B and C). The textual explanations explicitly describe the objects involved (fruits B and C) and the actions performed (comparison and appending) which resulted in C being appended before B due to C’s lesser weight. On the bottom row, the interface highlighted in red that fruits were out of order (B and C) and described the correct ordering.
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching
27 Fig.5:Sorttraininginterface.Insorttraining,participantswereadvisedtosortsequencesoffruits(inthiscasefruitsA,D,B,C,Eand F) in the centre white box called the “whiteboard” and provided instructions to efficiently use it. The “whiteboard” was a device of the interface which allowed a free arrangement of the input fruit sequence by using a mouse to drag and drop fruits. The labels and fruits wereintentionallyrandomisedbeforethe experimentsothatparticipantswouldnot receivethewrongimpression thatthesequence had been already alphabetically ordered.
28 LunAietal. eachofthequestionsequences,wemadesurethatitwasnottrivialandrequiredan appropriate level of computational effort for a machine program to sort. A question in the merge training and performance test involved two sub-sequences of similar sizes as inputs and the length of each sub-sequence ranged from 1 to 4. Inthesorttrainingandperformancetest,aquestionconsistsofafruitsequence and the length of sequences varied from 6 to 10. In the pilot trials, we identified a higher usage of the insertion sort algorithm. For generating sort training and testing questions, we made an adjustment to include sequences that would lead to an advantage in the number of comparisons made when applying the merge sort algorithmovertheinsertionsortalgorithm.Thischangewouldallowroomforpeople to optimise their sorting strategy instead of adhering to what they already knew. The sequences in performance tests are different from those in the training stages but they share similar patterns. Problem setup To make the experiment more engaging, we introduced the task background where each participant was asked to help two robots, Alice and Bob, perform tasks in two warehouses.Eachrobotwasresponsibleforadistincttaskandprovidedinformation about the associated task to the participant. The robot Alice was designed to teach merging while the other one Bob taught participants how to sort. To evoke an understanding of the connection between merging and sorting, at the beginning of the experiment, participants were explicitly reminded with a note of the link between task materials taught by two robots and were encouraged to pay attention to the connection. Tolearnmerging,participantswereaskedtolearnfromtherobotAliceandhelp it operate a special machine to arrange fruits on a conveyor belt. In Figure 3, fruits labelled with A, B, C and D were inputs to a machine called the “blue star” that representedthemergingoperation.Eachquestioninthesectionsrelatedtomerging asked the participant to merge two sequences of fruits. The balance scale to the left of the interface page (Figure 3, 4 and 5) allowed participantstocomparetheweightsoffruitsbyenteringtwofruits’alphabeticlabels on both sides of the balance. Participants were presented with instructions to use the balance scale. The balance would tilt to the side of the fruit that is heavier. A piece of text would be shown to further clarify the result of comparing two fruits. Participants were provided with the information that the two input sequences of fruits in the questions had increasing weights from left to right. Two output answer choicesdifferedinthefruitsthatwerehighlightedwiththeyellowcolour.Participants were asked to select from one of the two output answer choices that had the fruits in the correct order. Feedback was presented as shown by Figure 4 on whether the participant’s selection was correct. Based on the same initial problem state, this feedback provides apairofpositiveandnegativeexampleswhichhelpscontrastthecorrectandwrong sequence of decision-making. The white blocks on the right-hand-side of Figure 4 contain textual and graphical explanations that instantiate the logic rules learned by Metagol in Table 1. Groups without machine-learned explanations would only O see blank white boxes with no textual and graphical explanations during the merge training stage of the experiment.
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 29 Table 7: Group 1 learned merging before learning sorting and was provided with visualandtextualexplanationsofmergingbasedonmachine-learnedrules.Group2 receivedthesamecurriculumasGroup1butwithoutexplanations.Theparticipants in Group 3 learned sorting prior to learning merging with explanations in the same format as received by Group 1. Group 4 did not get explanations. EX WEX WOEX CO MS Group1(MS/WEX) Group2(MS/WOEX) SM Group3(SM/WEX) Group4(SM/WOEX)
5.3 Method and design The experiment2 was implemented based on a four-group factorial 2×2 design to accountforallcombinations(Table7)ofthetwoindependentexperimentalvariables, the curriculum order (CO) and the presentation of explanations (EX). Figure 6 shows two curriculum orders. In the curriculum shown by Figure 6a, participants received training material on merging first. In the reverse curriculum demonstrated by Figure 6b, subjects were trained on sorting first. Fig. 6: In setup (a), participants learned merging before learning sorting (MS). In setup (b), participants learned sorting before learning merging (SM). Participants were not allowed to repeat the experiment. Every participant was assignedtoonegroupandwentthroughtrainingandtestwithnorepeat.Allgroups received the same material of training examples and test questions. The numbers of questionsintheexperimentsectionsmergetraining,mergetesting,sorttrainingand sorttestingwere6,5,4and8respectively.However,thenumbersequencesusedfor merging were different from those used for sorting in order to prevent participants from reusing previous answers. We recorded participants’ basic information such as their age, gender and education after acquiring their consent. This allows us to control the distribution of backgroundinexperimentgroups.Tocontrolparticipants’cognitiveability,wethen
2 Theexperimentinterfaceisavailableonhttps://github.com/LAi1997/sequential-teaching. TheinterfacewascreatedusingPsychoPy[71],anopen-sourcepackageforimplementingfree interfaceswithstimuluspresentationandcontrolinPythonandJavaScript.
30 LunAietal. collected their responses in the MaRs-IB pre-test based on Section 5.1. The experiment would start with a participation consent followed by the MaRs-IB pre-test and an introduction to the task background. Participants were advised prior to the beginning of the experiment on the approximate length of the experiment and the requirements. Participants were informed that if they have colour-vision deficiency, they should not participate in the study. Inordertogaininformationaboutparticipants’experiencerelatingtoprogrammingandsortingalgorithms,weadditionallyaskedparticipantstofilloutthefollowing questions after the completion of all performance tests: 1) whether participants have a degree in computer science or a certificate in programming, 2) if they have studiedorarelearningsortingalgorithmsinschooland3)whethertheyknoworhave appliedanysortingalgorithmswhilebeingpresentedwithalistofsortingalgorithms
(two of which are distracting choices and do not exist). Task-related information was presented via the interface throughout the experiment.Allgroupsreceivedaperformancetestofsortinglast.Thisexperimentdesign ensured all groups experienced the same amount of training and performance tests respecting the curriculum order. In merge training, participants first answered the displayed question illustrated by Figure 3 and were taken to the next page where feedback and explanations were presented. In Figure 4, explanations are presented in two rows which demonstrate the correct and the wrong action sequences. The format in which participants were askedtoinputtheirresponsesisthesameinthemergeperformancetest,sorttraining and sort performance test. When providing a sequence response, participants were requiredtoinputlabelsrepresentingthefruitsequencethattheybelievedtohaveincreasingweightsfromlefttoright.AnotherrobotinstructorBobhelpedparticipants learn to operate the machine “purple diamond” to sort fruits. Inthesorttrainingandperformancetest,participantsshouldputfruitsintoshippingboxesbyenteringfruitlabelsintoasequenceoftextboxes.Inthesorttraining
(Figure 5), participants were informed of the number of comparisons their robot instructor Bob made to sort the input sequences. Participants were asked to sort the sameinputsequencesandencouragedtousefewercomparisons.Theintentionofthis competition was to provide an incentive for participants to consciously think about how to revise their strategy in order to improve sorting efficiency. This information was accessible by participants in all groups during the sort training. In the sorting sections, participants were also provided with the balance scale instrument. Participants were encouraged to take two sessions of one-minute rest, one after theMaRs-IBpre-testandonepriortothefinalperformancetestofsorting.Thebreak sessions allowed participants to recharge and regain attention to perform tasks in later stages. The progress bar at the top of the interface showed the percentage of materials that the participants had completed with respect to all materials in the experiment. Participants could use the progress bar to estimate the time that they wouldneedtofinishtheexperimentwithintheallocatedsession.Foralltrainingand performance test sections, we recorded response time, answers and the comparisons made for analysis. The final section included four reflective questions. We asked participantswhethertheyunderstoodtheconnectionbetweenthetwotasksorused what they learned in one task for the other task. We also checked their background in programming and sorting algorithms in the survey at the end of the experiment.
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 31
(a)Meanmergeperformancetestscoresand (b) Mean sort performance test scores and standarderrors. standarderrors. Fig.7:Performancetestscores(PS)offourgroups,Group1(MS/WEX)Group2
(MS/WOEX), Group 3 (SM/WEX) and Group 4 (SM/WOEX) with standard errors. Across the x-axis in (a), data points indicate the change in the mean merge performancescoreasaresultoflearningwithexplanations.In(b),theredlineshows the mean sort performance score when participants learned with explanations and the blue line represents the mean sort performance score when participants learned without explanations. Across the x-axis in (b), data points show the change in the mean sort performance score as a result of altering the curriculum arrangement.
5.4 Results Prior to the experiment, we conducted two experimental trials with one sample of studentsfromtheUniversityofBambergandanotherstudentsamplefromImperial CollegeLondon.Thetrialstudiesprovidedadditionalinsightsintotheinterfaceand helped us revise the experimental design. However, due to the limited scale of the trials,wewerenotabletoobserveanymeaningfuloutcome.Weproceededtorecruit alargersampleof124mixed-backgroundparticipantsfromAmazonMechanicalTurk
(AMT).These124participantsfromAMTwererandomisedandassignedtothefour groups. A partition of 79 participants was created based on the MaRs-IB test and those included had a test accuracy within one standard deviation (σ =.169) of the mean (µ = .654). Demographically, this partition had a lower male-to-female ratio
(36to42,oneoptedout),mostparticipantswerebetween25to54inage(61of79) and almost all had a college degree or higher (67 of 79). Analysis of task performance We focused on this AMT sample partition and employed a quantitative approach to test hypotheses H1 to H5. The AMT partition had an even distribution of participants in the four groups, Group 1 (MS and WEX, n = 20), Group 2 (MS and WOEX, n = 20), Group 3 (SM and WEX, n = 20) and Group 4 (SM and WOEX, n = 19). Figure 7a and Figure 7b present the mean performance score
32 LunAietal. Table 8: Mean strategy frequency in sort training and sort performance test. Each human sorting trace in the sort training and sort performance test was matched to one of the following categories of sorting algorithms, bubble sort (BS), dictionary sort (DS), insertion sort (IS), merge sort (MS), quick sort (QS), a combination of insertion and dictionary sort (Hybrid) and unclassified (Other). The number of humansortingtracesineachcategorywasaveragedbythetotalnumberoftraces.We highlightpositivedifferencesgreaterthan.05ingreyandinboldfont.Ineachgroup, the highlighted difference is the largest increase in algorithm application frequency from sort training to sort performance test. Categories BS DS IS MS QS Hybrid Other PS Group 1 (MS/WEX) – – – – – – – Training .012 .075 .150 .000 .175 .162 .425 Performancetest .056 .094 .162 .025 .238 .175 .250 Differences .044 .019 .012 .025 .063 .013 -.175 Group 2 (MS/WOEX) – – – – – – – Training .000 .062 .162 .025 .162 .225 .362 Performancetest .012 .038 .181 .100 .194 .181 .294 Differences .012 -.024 .019 .075 .032 -.044 -.068 Group 3 (SM/WEX) – – – – – – – Training .012 .050 .088 .038 .225 .175 .412 Performancetest .019 .138 .100 .025 .244 .119 .356 Differences .007 .088 .012 -.013 .019 -.056 -.056 Group 4 (SM/WOEX) – – – – – – – Training .000 .079 .184 .026 .158 .237 .316 Performancetest .013 .099 .243 .053 .158 .237 .197 Differences .013 .020 .059 .027 .000 .000 -.119
(PS) of the groups in the merge performance test and sort performance test. For each performance test, we carried out an ANOVA test to assess the effect of the independent experimental variables followed by a Tukey’s HSD test. We used a significance criterion α=.05 for both tests. Figure 7a illustrates almost no change to the mean merge performance score whenexplanationswereintroduced.Theone-wayANOVAtestdidnotdemonstrate a significant effect of the machine-learned theory (EX) on the merge performance test score (PS). Figure 7b illustrates a pattern that switching from the curriculum order MS to SM results in a reduction in performance. The two-way ANOVA test indicated a significant effect (F = 10.4,p = .001 < .05) of curriculum order (CO) on sort performance test score (PS). The post-hoc Tukey’s HSD test confirmed a significantly beneficial effect (p=.001<.05) of the sequential teaching curriculum MS(Group1andGroup2)overSM(Group3andGroup4).Thetwo-wayANOVA test did not show a significant effect of the machine-learned theory (EX) on sort performancetestscore(PS)andthereisnoevidenceofaninteractioneffectbetween curriculum order (CO) and presence of explanations (EX). Analysis of human sorting strategy Inadditiontotheperformancescore,weanalysethecorrespondencebetweenhuman sorting strategies and machine sorting algorithms. For sorting, sequential decisionmaking is revealed through the actions that human sorters make to arrange items
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 33 according to a specified order. In particular, we consider the comparisons of objects as traces of decision making which indicate the sorting strategy used by human sorters and the sorting algorithm implemented by a machine program. When there is a consistently high correlation of comparison execution between a human sorter and a machine algorithm, we assume that this human executes a strategy that closely implements the machine algorithm. Considering the target human population has limited programming experience, we additionally assume that a human sorting strategy would implement at best quick sort, merge sort, insertion sort, bubble sort or dictionary sort. Based on the results and preferences of the trial participants, we include hybrid variants of insertion sort and dictionary sort. These hybrid variants initially perform insertion sort until the intermediate result reaches length k and then execute binary searches of the conventional dictionary sorttoinserttherestofthenumbersintothepartiallysortedsequence.Intotal,we implemented twenty-four algorithms including the conventional implementations of quicksort,mergesort,insertionsort,bubblesortanddictionarysortaswellastheir variants (different pivoting, merge and insertion implementations). Example 7 Given Ns = [4, 6, 5, 2, 3, 1] is a sequence of numbers for a human participant h and a set of machine algorithms to sort. Let M denote the human h sortingalgorithmandht(Ns,M )=[(6,4),(5,2),(3,1),(4,2),(5,4),(6,5),(2,1), h
(3, 2), (4, 3)]. We are able to find a close match of the human trace. The machine trace is produced by the bottom-up variant of the merge sort algorithm denoted as M0 and mt(Ns,M0) = [(4, 6), (5, 2), (2, 4), (4, 5), (5, 6), (3, 1), (1, 2), (2, 3), (3,
4)]. For each of the N ×N combinations of number pairs, we check whether it is a member of the traces. Two symmetric pairs of numbers, e.g. (4, 6) and (6, 4), are consideredidentical.Wecreatethefollowing2×2contingencytable.TheChi-squared Notinhumantrace Inhumantrace Notinmachinetrace 13 1 Inmachinetrace 1 10 test3 in this example has a X2 =14.3 with p<.001 which confirms the correlation of number pairs in ht(Ns,Mh) and mt(Ns,M0). For common pairs of numbers in ht(Ns,Mh) and mt(Ns,M0), we obtain their ranks and compute Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient. The correlation coefficient is .9 and p<.001 which confirms the monotonic relationship between the two traces. Given an input set of integers Ns and a sorting algorithm M, a sorting trace M(Ns) is a list of pairs < n ,n > denoting the comparisons of integers made by i j M where n ,n ∈ Ns. We employ two statistical tests (Example 7) to estimate i j the correspondence between a human sorting trace and a machine sorting trace. Let n be an integer and Ns denote the set of integers in the interval [1,n]. Let Tr be a cross product defined by Tr : Ns×Ns, a comparison in a trace is a pair
<n ,n >∈Tr wheren ,n ∈Ns.GivenahumantracewithsortingalgorithmM i j i j h andamachinetracewithalgorithmM,foreverypair<n ,n >∈Tr,wecheckif< i j n ,n >isamemberofht(Ns,M )andif<n ,n >isamemberofmt(Ns,M).We i j h i j
3 WeaddonetoallfrequencycountstoavoidincludingzerosinthetablefortheChi-squared test.
34 LunAietal. then perform a Chi-squared test of independence with a significance level α =.025 using the 2×2 contingency table and check for rejection. The significance criterion of the Chi-squared test is set at .025 to reduce the probability of mismatching a human trace with a wrong machine trace. A rejection of the Chi-squared test’s null hypothesis implies an association between comparisons made by the human sorter and comparisons made by the program. Once a test is rejected, we exclude comparisonpairsthatarenotintheintersectionofht(Ns,M )andmt(Ns,M)from h bothtracesandcomputeSpearman’srankcorrelationcoefficient[87].Theintention of computing Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient is to examine the ordering alignment of compared integer pairs. Sinceperformingcomparisonsinthereverseorderofthemachinetracedoesnot correspond to a reverse execution of the algorithm, we confirm a match (α = .05) between a human strategy and a machine algorithm only when Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient is positive. Table8demonstratesthechangeinthedistributionofstrategyasthedifference in mean strategy frequency from the training and performance test. In addition, Table9showsthestrategyadaptationofparticipants.Participantswerecategorised withrespecttowhethertheyhadappliedaparticularstrategyinthetrainingphase and in the performance test. We then employ McNemar’s tests (approximated by binomial distribution for small frequencies) to determine if there is a difference in the number of participants who applied the strategy in the test and who used it in training.Forstrategiesthathavebeenidentifiedtohaveincreasedapplicationsfrom the training to performance test, we additionally examine the performance of these strategies using t-tests. Group 1 (MS/WEX) and Group 3 (SM/WEX) both received explanations
(WEX).AccordingtoTable8,fromtrainingtoperformancetesttheaverageuseof quicksortinGroup1increasedby.063andtheaverageapplicationofdictionarysort inGroup3improvedby.088.McNemar’stest(α=.05)reportsasignificantchange in the application of quick sort in Group 1 (p=.031<.05). There is no significant difference in the application of dictionary sort in Group 3. Based on Table 9, in Group 1, we can observe that more participants used quick sort in the performance test (13) than in the training stage (7). Furthert-tests(α=.05)onperformancetestscoresshowedthatinGroup1quick sort like approaches (µ=.834,σ =.274) achieved a higher mean score (p=.043<
.05) than the rest of the strategies (µ = .729,σ = .337) and in Group 3 responses corresponding to dictionary sort like approaches (µ = .885,σ = .288) had a better performance(p=.007<.05)thantheotherstrategycategories(µ=.679,σ=.373). Group 2 (MS/WOEX) and Group 4 (SM/WOEX) did not receive explanations (WOEX). From Table 8, in Group 2 the frequency of application of merge sort increased by .075 and in Group 4 the average use of insertion sort increased by
.059. McNemar’s tests show significant changes in the application of merge sort in Group2(p=.016<.05)andinsertionsortinGroup4(p=.001<.05).InTable9, we can observe that in Group 2 more participants were using merge sort in test (9) than in training (2). In Group 4, almost all participants used insertion sort in the performance test (18) compared with in the training (7). Additional t-tests (α = .05) showed no performance difference in Group 2 between merge sort like approaches (µ = .872,σ = .209) and the other strategies
(µ = .827,σ = .288). In contrast, insertion like approaches (µ = .877,σ = .285) in
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 35 Table 9: The number of participants in Group 1 to 4 who had applied one of the highlighted algorithms (QS, MS, DS and IS) in the training and the performance test.InTable8,algorithmsQS,MS,DSandIShaveincreasedapplicationfrequency inGroup1,2,3and4respectively.Everyparticipantwascategorisedwithrespectto whethertheyhadappliedthestrategyatleastonceinsorttrainingandperformance test.Whileapartfromthosefouralgorithmsanalyseswereperformedineachgroup with other strategies, the results presented were the most distinguished. Group 1 (MS/WEX) Training Quick Sort Application Noapplication Total Application 7 6 13 Performancetest Noapplication 0 7 7 Total 7 13 20 Group 2 (MS/WOEX) Training Merge Sort Application Noapplication Total Application 2 7 9 Performancetest Noapplication 0 11 11 Total 2 18 20 Group 3 (SM/WEX) Training Dictionary Sort Application Noapplication Total Application 3 7 10 Performancetest Noapplication 1 9 10 Total 4 16 20 Group 4 (SM/WOEX) Training Insertion Sort Application Noapplication Total Application 7 11 18 Performancetest Noapplication 0 1 1 Total 7 12 19 Group 4 achieved a higher mean score (p = .001 < .05) than the other strategies
(µ=.644,σ=.399).
5.5 Discussion In Table 10, we present experimental hypotheses H1 to H5 and summarise their test outcomes. Since this work investigates the effect of curriculum order, we have acknowledged the possibility of recency and primacy effects on human sorting performance.Recencyandprimacyeffects[68]arecognitivebiaseswhichleadtobetter recallofitemsandconceptsthatarepositionedtowardsthebeginningandtheendof asequence.Asitispartofourexperimentalplantoexplorehowhumancomprehensionisaffectedbydifferentsequentialordersofconcepts,itisdifficulttocompletely eliminate the impact of position effects. In addition, Table 9 shows that various degrees of adaptations to efficient sorting algorithms happened in multiple groups. This indicates the adjustment of participants to different decision-making processes beyond making better or worse recall as a result of learning in sequential curricula. Basedonthedefinitionofsorter/2learnedbyMetagol afterlearningmerger/2 O in Table 1, the program size is u=3 and the number of predicates including those used in merger/2 is p = 8. For the definition of sorter/2 learned by Metagol O without learning merger/2 in the same table, the size of sorter/2 is u+k = 5
36 LunAietal. Table 10: H1 to H3 are hypotheses concerning the effects of curriculum order and explanations on human sorting comprehension. Hypotheses H4 and H5 relate to explanatory effects on human comprehension of merging and sorting strategy. At the top of table, H stands for hypothesis, T denotes test outcome. In the rightmost column, C is an abbreviation for confirmed, and N stands for not confirmed. H T H1 Learning merging before learning sorting leads to a beneficial effect on hu- C mancomprehensionofsortingwithrespecttolearningsortingbeforelearning merging H2 Learningmergingwithexplanationsresultsinabeneficialexplanatoryeffect N onhumancomprehensionofsortingwithrespecttolearningmergingwithout explanations H3 Learning merging with explanations further increases the beneficial effect of N curriculumorderonhumancomprehensionofsortingwithrespecttolearning mergingwithoutexplanations H4 Learningmergingwithexplanationsgeneratedfromruleswithoutalowcog- C nitive cost does not result in a beneficial explanatory effect on human comprehensionofmerging H5 Learningmergingwithexplanationsbeforelearningsortingleadstoadapta- C tionofefficienthumansortingstrategieswithbetterperformance and the number of predicates used is p+c = 6. According to the Conjecture 3,
3·ln(8)<5·ln(6)andlearningmergingbeforelearningsortingresultsinareduction in the size of the hypothesis space associated with the target hypothesis of sorting. TheANOVAtestandTukey’sHSDtestonsortperformancetestscores(Figure7b) demonstratedabeneficialeffectfromcurriculumorder.Ahighersortingperformance has been observed only in groups with the incremental curriculum setup. Since all four groups received the same material in each stage of the experiment so we can eliminate the possibility of learning merging or sorting being a major effect which led to the observed difference in sorting performance. Hence, we attribute the improvement in the performance score of sorting to the incremental curriculum order. This evidence confirms hypothesis H1 and E (C , C ,sorter) + seq MS/WEX SM/WEX E (C , C ,sorter) > 0 which supports Conjecture 3. seq MS/WOEX SM/WOEX Resultsonmergeandsortperformancetestsdidnotshowexplanatoryeffectsof the merger/2 rules learned by Metagol . The ANOVA test did not show a signifO icant effect of explanations on human comprehension and there was no significant interactioneffectonhumancomprehension.Therefore,werejecthypothesesH2and H3duetothelackofevidence.Learningmergingwithexplanationsdidnotimprove or degrade human comprehension of sorting in regard to learning merging without explanations. In addition, the ANOVA test on the merge performance test scores did not demonstrate an effect of explanations on human comprehension. This result confirms H4 and supports Conjecture 2. Since merging was taught in isolation independent from other secondary or tertiary concepts, we refer to the cognitive window (Remark 1) for a plausible account ofthislackofexplanatoryeffectonhumancomprehensionofmerging.Thecognitive
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 37 Table 11: Summary of the significance of participant’s strategy adaptation and performance improvement of the adapted algorithm compared with other algorithms. A tick denotes a significant analysis result, and a cross indicates an insignificant analysis outcome. Algorithm Isadaptation Isperformance Group adapted significant improvementsignificant Group1(MS/WEX) QS (cid:88) (cid:88) Group2(MS/WOEX) MS (cid:88) X Group3(SM/WEX) DS X (cid:88) Group4(SM/WOEX) IS (cid:88) (cid:88) cost of executing explained rules of merging is not sufficiently lower than the cognitivecostofoperatingamergingsolutionwithouttheauxiliaryinformation.Owingto limited cognitive capacities, a reduction in computational cost usually corresponds toanimprovementinperformance.However,solutionsofmergingafterreceivingexplanationswerenotsufficientlyoptimisedtoyieldanobservablyhigherperformance scorecomparedwithhumanprimitivesolutionsintheabsenceofexplanations.Given the tasks and the sequential teaching setup, an incremental curriculum order had a significant effect which improved human comprehension. The results provided a demonstration of the beneficial effect of sequential teaching on human comprehension. Furthermore,weexaminedhumancomparisonsandestimatedsortingalgorithms thatbestresembledhumansortingtraces.Thisanalysis(Table8)ledtotherecognitionoffourpossiblesortingstrategyadaptations.FromTable9andMcNemar’stests, we show that there is a significant difference in the algorithm application of quick sortinGroup1,mergesortinGroup2andinsertionsortinGroup4.Wearguethat theseresultssupportahigherproportionofstrategyadaptationstothesealgorithms. The additional t-tests compared the sorting performance of adapted strategies with other strategies. Quick sort in Group 1, dictionary sort in Group 3 and insertion sortinGroup4hadhigherperformanceincomparisonwithotheralgorithms.Table
11 summarises the participants’ adaptations to algorithms and the performance of responses with these adaptations. StrategyadaptationsinGroup1(MS/WEX)andGroup4(SM/WOEX)were significant and resulted in higher performance scores of the associated responses comparedwiththeotherstrategies.Aftersorttraining,Group1usedahighervolume ofquicksortlikestrategies.Thequicksortalgorithmiscomputationallyefficientwith an average linearithmic run-time and a worst-case quadratic run-time. Utilising the efficiencybenefitofconcentratingonpartsoftheoriginalproblemoneatatime,quick sortcreatesapivottoconstructtwosortedsub-sequences.Basedonthefollow-upttests,adaptationtoquicksortledtobettercomprehensioncomparedwithresponses thatusedtheothersortingstrategies.SinceinGroup1participantslearnedmerging
38 LunAietal. with explanations before learning sorting, this refutes the null hypothesis of H5. This positive difference in sorting performance from using quick sort in Group 1 allows us to confirm hypothesis H5. The t-test results of Group 1 and 3 (summarised in Table 11) suggest that curriculum order does not affect the performance of adapted strategies since Group
1 experienced the incremental curriculum and Group 3 received the decremental curriculum. This observation contrasts with the overall performance analysis which showscurriculumorderaffectstheperformanceofsorting.ItimpliesthatthedecrementalcurriculuminGroup3reducestheperformanceofstrategiesthathavealower changeinapplicationrate.Wepostulatethatwithoutthebenefitoftheincremental curriculum and a compact hypothesis space (Conjecture 3), it is difficult to develop rules that consistently represent the other algorithms (quick sort and merge sort). In addition, we observed in Group 1 that learning incrementally with explanations ledtoasignificantadaptationofanefficientsortingstrategy(quicksort)whichalso has enhanced performance. This shows the association of a higher task competency with the development of novel problem solutions in novices. Impacts of explanations on performance As summarised in Table 11, in Group 1 and 3 where explanations were presented, theadaptationstoefficientsortingapproachescorrespondtoimprovedperformance. Asignificantnumberofparticipantsadaptedtoquicksortlikeapproachesandsome participants adjusted to dictionary sort like strategies in Group 3. Although the dictionarysortalgorithmsharesmanysimilartraitstoinsertionsort,dictionarysort isconsideredadivide-and-conqueralgorithmwhichiterativelymakesbinarysearches for the correct position of an object in a sequence. We attribute this phenomenon to a better understanding of efficiently merging: two input sequences are sorted and redundant comparisons can be avoided by interleaving comparisons of fruits from input sequences. Provided explanations emphasised the optimal problem-solution structure and illustrated the action sequence by walking through examples with participants. The contexts provided by explanations and examples are effective for the human learning of abstract concepts [3,6,
16,75]. We suggest that in the presented teaching setup, explanations of merging involving examples grounded the concept of binary selection and contextualised the constructionofproblemsolutionsthatutilisedthisinformation.Asaresult,problem solutionsthatincorporatedthisideahadlesspotentialforerrorsandachievedhigher performance. This proposition can be partially supported by the increase in the usage of insertion sort like strategies in Group 4 (SM/WOEX) where explanations were absent. While insertion sort like strategies correlated to better scores in sort performancetestresponsesofGroup4,theinsertionsortalgorithmdoesnotinvolve a divide-and-conquer or binary selection component to sorting and does not share these features with quick sort or dictionary sort. Impacts of curriculum order on strategy adaptation Another observation from Table 9 and 11 is that a significant number of responses in Group 2 (MS/WOEX) adapted to merge sort. While this strategy adaptation of Group 2 to merge sort did not correlate with a higher performance score compared with the other strategies, divide-and-conquer algorithms such as quick sort
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 39 andmergesortthatrequireanadvancedunderstandingofcomputationalalgorithms could be rather difficult for novices to comprehend in a limited time frame. Based on Table 9 and 11, it is noteworthy that a significant number of participants in Group1and2appearedtohavedevelopedsortingapproachessimilartothesewellknowndivide-and-conqueralgorithmswhentheywerepresentedwithconceptswith increasing complexity. A tentative account of this phenomenon can be referred to Conjecture3.InConjecture3,twocurriculaarecomparedintermsofthesizeofthe compositehypothesisspacesoflearningsometargetpredicates.Learningconceptsin an incremental fashion reduces the size of the hypothesis space. Since humans have limited working memory capacity, it becomes easier for humans to find a consistent hypothesis that incorporates new information in the associated hypothesis space. DespiteperformanceimprovementsofadaptedstrategiesinbothGroup1and3, the adaptation of an efficient strategy was significant and led to better performance in only Group 1, as summarised in Table 11. As Group 1 exclusively experienced incremental curriculum and machine-learned explanations, this result highlights the impact of combining both components on human learning for promoting task performance and developing novel problem solutions. Although it cannot be assessed by the present framework whether the participants mentally formulated quick sort or merge sort in an explicit way, further investigations of sequential teaching could devise machine learning to derive human strategy from behavioural traces.
6 Conclusions and further work Previous publications [2,66] on the topic of comprehensibility have investigated the classificationofexplanatorymachinelearningintobeneficialandharmfulcategories. The current work proposes an extension of frameworks of comprehensibility [66] and explanatory effects [2] to account for the effects of sequence teaching. Owing to the reduction in the size of the hypothesis space [29], we hypothesise that learning concepts with increasing complexity enables humans to learn the target hypotheses given limited working memory capacity. This conjecture is supported by our empirical results. Inthelimitedscopeofourexperimentwhichfocusesonhumanlearningofsorting algorithms, we have identified an instance of sequential teaching curricula in which learningmergingbeforelearningsortingresultsinabetterhumancomprehensionof sorting in contrast to learning sorting before learning merging. This result demonstrates an improvement in human comprehension as a result of learning concepts with increasing complexity. We refer to the cognitive window [2] to account for the lack of explanatory effects on human comprehension of merging. It is difficult to improve human comprehension from explanations generated from machine-learned ruleswhenthecognitivecostofthetaskisalreadylow.Inthiscase,explanationsdo notcauseasufficientlyhighimprovementinthecognitivecostofperformingthetask. However, we have taken a rather conservative approach which has led to interesting preliminary results of sequential teaching in a specific domain. While this work is anextendedinvestigationofmachinelearningcomprehensibilitybasedontranslated logic programs, we also acknowledge the potential of developing comprehensibility definitionsbeyondsymbolicmachinelearningandournoise-freeframeworkforfuture work.
40 LunAietal. Instruction-based teaching approaches have the advantage of clarity and directnessforhumanlearning[90]andallowpreviousknowledgetobeintegratedwithnew problem-solving contexts [35]. However, such teaching approaches may impose an over-restrictiononthelinksbetweenactionsandoutcomesandthereforefailtotriggeranindividualisedunderstandinggeneralisedfromthematerial[20].Inthehuman trial, we employed a mixed approach to teaching that combined instruction-based learningwithdiscoverylearning.Weexploredamachine-humanteachinginteraction wherecurriculaallowahigherdegreeoffreedomforlearnerstore-discovercomputationallyefficientalgorithms.Weobservedadaptationsofhumansortingstrategiesto utilise advanced techniques of divide-and-conquer. Such strategy adaptations were observed in humans who learned with explanations and in humans who learned concepts with incremental complexity. When both conditions were fulfilled, humans adapted to an efficient divide-and-conquer strategy with higher performance. We attribute these results to the contextualisation of abstract concepts by explanations andtheaccessibilityoflearnedknowledgefromthereductionincomplexityinsearching the hypothesis space. In these cases, human learners were able to adapt sorting strategies reminiscent of efficient machine sorting algorithms. Although the analysed participant sample had no background in programming, they adapted sorting strategies by employing divide-and-conquer techniques commonly found in efficient computational sorting algorithms. While not all inspected human learners managed to consistently perform these sorting algorithms after studying from short learning sessions, being able to develop “near-miss” versions of the merge sort algorithm is a remarkable achievement for those with no background in programming. An exciting prospect of sequential teaching curricula is that machines and humans could take up more active roles to enable two-way cooperative learning [85]. Sequentialteachingcurriculacanbeextendedtorepresentthecoordinationbetween humans and machines in a back-and-forth fashion. Human implicit decision-making
(System1)couldbemadeexplicit(System2)[46]tobenefithumanproblem-solving
[81] by machine-learned theories via a process known as behavioural cloning [19]. Traces of human problem solutions can be provided as inputs to an ILP system, whichmightproduceexplicitalgorithmsfromthetracestopresenttothehumanas explanations.A“cleanup”effectonahuman’sbehaviourscanbeachievedbasedon the error estimation of the machine-learned human algorithm in training. The debugging of behaviours guided by the prediction of error of a human strategy can be beneficialinintelligenttutoring[95]andforcooperativeprogramminginalgorithmic debugging [84]. Future work may also explore the phenomenon of human re-discovery of wellestablished domain knowledge. An investigation of partially guided development of efficientproblem-solvingstrategieswouldrequireexposingtheimplicitcognitiveprocesses.Externaltoolssuchaseye-trackingdevices[15]canbeusedtocapturesubtle motions of the human body to help us infer implicit human decision-making. Our observations have shown the creativeness of human learning in exploiting the analogical transfer of partial solution structure. For machine learners, insights obtained inotherdomainscanbeutilisedtolearnflexibleandefficientproblemsolutions[18,
50]. For human learners, the division of information into smaller “chunks” and the presentationofrule-basedexplanationsfacilitatethetransferofpriorknowledgeinto a new problem-solving context [10]. The inclusion of both teaching techniques has the potential to trigger sudden realisations of previously incomprehensible concepts that might lead to innovative learning outcomes. In contrast, the absence of these
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 41 teachingmechanismsmighthinderhumanlearningofcomplextasksandleadtomore laborious problem-solving strategies. However, further investigations are needed to gainabetterunderstandingofthedegreetowhichsequentialteachingcurriculawith machine-learned explanations facilitate novel human comprehension. Declarations
– Funding ThisresearchwaspartiallysupportedbyTAILOR,aprojectfundedbyEUHorizon 2020 research and innovation programme under GA No. 952215. The third author acknowledges support from the UK’s EPSRC Human-Like Computing Network.
– Conflict of interest/Competing interests The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
– Ethics approval Ethicsapprovalwasnotrequired.Includeddataandexperimentswereconducted by Imperial College London. Prior to carrying out the experiment, the authors hadreferredtotheethicsapprovalguidelineprovidedbyImperialCollegeLondon
(https://www.imperial.ac.uk/research-ethics-committee/ethics-approval-overview/). The authors had assessed that none of the five criteria applied to the planned experiment. Hence, the judgement was "No, we do not need to apply". The authors confirmed with the Research Governance and Integrity team at Imperial College London who accepted the authors’ judgement.
– Consent to participate Informedconsentforparticipationintheexperimentwasobtainedfromallindividual participants included in the study.
– Consent for publication Informed consent for publication of data was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
– Availability of data and materials Experimental material and data have been made available at https://github.com/LAi1997/sequential-teaching.
– Code availability Source code has been made available at https://github.com/LAi1997/sequential-teaching.
42 LunAietal.
– Authors’ contributions Author1wroteallpapersectionsexceptSection5.1.Author2wroteSection5.1. Author 2, 3 and 4 provided feedback and corrections on all paper sections. References
1. A.AdadiandM.Berrada. Peekinginsidetheblack-box:Asurveyonexplainableartificial intelligence(xai). IEEE Access,6:52138–52160,2018.
2. L.Ai,S.Muggleton,C.Hocquette,M.Gromowski,andU.Schmid.Beneficialandharmful explanatorymachinelearning. Machine Learning,110:695–721,2021.
3. V. Aleven and K. R. Koedinger. An effective metacognitive strategy: Learning by doing andexplainingwithacomputer-basedcognitivetutor. Cognitive science,26(2):147–179,
2002.
4. L. Alfieri, P. Brooks, N. Aldrich, and H. Tenenbaum. Does discovery-based instruction enhancelearning? Journal of Educational Psychology,103:1–18,2011.
5. O.Amir,F.Doshi-Velez,andD.Sarne.Summarizingagentstrategies.AutonomousAgent Multi-Agent System,33:628–644,2019.
6. J. R. Anderson, J. M. Fincham, and S. Douglass. The role of examples and rules in the acquisition of a cognitive skill. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,23(4):932,1997.
7. J. R. Anderson, N. Kushmerick, and C. Lebiere. Rules of the Mind, chapter The Tower ofHanoiandgoalstructures,pages121–142. Hillsdale,NJ:L.Erlbaum,1993.
8. J.R.AndersonandR.Thompson. Use of Analogy in a Production System Architecture, page267–297. CambridgeUniversityPress,USA,1989.
9. S.Anjomshoae,A.Najjar,D.Calvaresi,andK.Främling. Explainableagentsandrobots: Results from a systematic literature review. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems,page1078–1088,2019.
10. Y. Anzai and H. Simon. The theory of learning by doing. Psychological Review,
86(2):124–140,1979.
11. A. Arrieta, N. Díaz-Rodríguez, J. Ser, A. Bennetot, S. Tabik, A. Barbado, S. Garcia, S.Gil-Lopez,D.Molina,R.Benjamins,R.Chatila,andF.Herrera. Explainableartificial intelligence(xai):Concepts,taxonomies,opportunitiesandchallengestowardresponsible ai. Information Fusion,58:82–115,2020.
12. W. Arthur Jr and D. V. Day. Development of a short form for the raven advanced progressive matrices test. Educational and Psychological measurement, 54(2):394–403,
1994.
13. M.BainandS.H.Muggleton. MachineIntelligence13:MachineIntelligenceandInductive Learning,chapterLearningOptimalChessStrategies,page291–309. OxfordUniversityPress,Inc.,USA,1994.
14. A. G. Barto, R. S. Sutton, and C. Watkins. Learning and sequential decision making. UniversityofMassachusettsAmherst,MA,1989.
15. P. Bera, P. Soffer, and J. Parsons. Using eye tracking to expose cognitive processes in understanding conceptual models. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 43(4),
2019.
16. D. C. Berry and D. E. Broadbent. Complex problem solving: The European perspective, chapter Implicit learning in the control of complex systems, pages 131–150. Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates,Inc.,1995.
17. A. Blumer, A. Ehrenfeucht, D. Haussler, and M. K. Warmuth. Learnability and the vapnik–chervonenkisdimension. Journal of the ACM,36(4):929–965,1989.
18. I.Bratko. DiscoveryScience.DS2010.LectureNotesinComputerScience,volume6332, chapterDiscoveryofAbstractConceptsbyaRobot. Springer,Berlin,Heidelberg,2010.
19. I. Bratko, T. Urbančič, and C. Sammut. Behavioural cloning: Phenomena, results and problems. IFAC Proceedings Volumes,28(21):143–149,1995.
20. J.S.Bruner. Theartofdiscovery. Harvard Educational Review,31:21–32,1961.
21. J. S. Bruner, J. J. Goodnow, and G. A. Austin. A study of thinking. New York, NY: Wiley,1956.
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 43
22. M.Burke,S.Penkov,andS.Ramamoorthy.Fromexplanationtosynthesis:Compositional program induction for learning from demonstration. In A. Bicchi, H. Kress-Gazit, and S.Hutchinson,editors,Robotics: Science and System XV,2019.
23. J.Carbonell. Derivationalanalogy:Atheoryofreconstructiveproblemsolvingandexpertiseacquisition. Machine Learning,11:26,1985.
24. P. Carpenter, M. Just, and P. Shell. What one intelligence test measures: A theoretical account of the processing in the raven progressive matrices test. Psychological review,
97:404–431,1990.
25. M.ChiandS.Ohlsson.ComplexDeclarativeLearning.CambridgeUniversityPress,2005.
26. G.Chierchia,D.Fuhrmann,L.J.Knoll,B.P.Pi-Sunyer,A.L.Sakhardande,andS.Blakemore. The matrix reasoning item bank (mars-ib): novel, open-access abstract reasoning itemsforadolescentsandadults. Royal Society open science,6(190232),2019.
27. R. C. Craig. Directed versus independent discovery of established relations. Journal of Educational Psychology,47:223–234,1956.
28. A.Cropper. Efficientlylearningefficientprograms. PhDthesis,ImperialCollegeLondon,
2017.
29. A. Cropper. Playgol: Learning programs through play. In Proceedings of the TwentyEighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,pages6074–6080,2019.
30. A. Cropper and S. H. Muggleton. Learning efficient logical robot strategies involving composable objects. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence,page3423–3429,2015.
31. A.CropperandS.H.Muggleton. Metagolsystem. https://github.com/metagol/metagol,
2016.
32. R.Devidze,F.Mansouri,L.Haug,Y.Chen,andA.Singla. Understandingthepowerand limitations of teaching with imperfect knowledge. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,pages2647–2654,2020.
33. Z. Dienes and J. Perner. A theory of implicit and explicit knowledge. Behavioral and brain sciences,22(5):735–808,1999.
34. S.Džeroski,L.DeRaedt,andK.Driessens. Relationalreinforcementlearning. Machine Learning,43:7–52,2001.
35. M. R. E. Should there be a three-strikes rule against pure discovery learning? The case forguidedmethodsofinstruction. The American psychologist,59(1):14–19,2004.
36. A.A.Freitas. Comprehensibleclassificationmodels:Apositionpaper. SIGKDD Explor. Newsl.,15:1–10,2014.
37. J. H. Gennari, P. Langley, and D. Fisher. Models of incremental concept formation. Artificial Intelligence,40(1):11–61,1989.
38. D. Gentner and R. Landers. Analogical reminding: A good match is hard to find. Proceedings of the International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics,1985.
39. M. Gleicher. A framework for considering comprehensibility in modeling. Big data,
4(2):75–88,2016.
40. H. Goldstine and J. Neumann. Planning and coding of problems for an electronic computing instrument, part ii, volume 2. In John von Neumann Collected Works, Volume V: Design of Computers, Theory of Automata and Numerical Analysis, pages 152–214. PergamonPress,Oxford,England,1963.
41. R.Guidotti,A.Monreale,S.Ruggieri,F.Turini,F.Giannotti,andD.Pedreschi.Asurvey ofmethodsforexplainingblackboxmodels. ACMComputingSurveys,51(5):1–42,2018.
42. M.Hind,D.Wei,M.Campbell,N.Codella,A.Dhurandhar,andA.e.a.Mojsilovic. Ted: Teachingaitoexplainitsdecisions. Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society,2019.
43. J. R. Hobbs. In The Handbook of Pragmatics, chapter Abduction in Natural Language Understanding. Stevenage:PeterPeregrinus,2008.
44. K.J.HolyoakandK.Koh.Surfaceandstructuralsimilarityinanalogicaltransfer.Memory
& Cognition 15(4),pages332–340,1987.
45. P.N.Johnson-Laird.MentalModels:TowardsaCognitiveScienceofLanguage,Inference, and Consciousness. HarvardUniversityPress,USA,1986.
46. D.Kahneman. Thinking, fast and slow. Macmillan,2011.
47. R.King,K.Whelan,F.Jones,P.Reiser,C.Bryant,S.Muggleton,D.Kell,andS.Oliver. Functionalgenomichypothesisgenerationandexperimentationbyarobotscientist. Nature,427:247–252,2004.
48. J.E.Kittel. Anexperimentalstudyoftheeffectofexternaldirectionduringlearningon transferandretentionofprinciples. JournalofEducationalPsychology,48:391–405,1957.
44 LunAietal.
49. A. N. Kolmogorov. On tables of random numbers. Sankhya: The Indian Journal of Statistics, Series A,,207(25):369–375,1963.
50. G. Leban, J. Žabkar, and I. Bratko. An experiment in robot discovery with ILP. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Inductive Logic Programming,page
77–90,Berlin,Heidelberg,2008.Springer-Verlag.
51. M.LeeandA.Thompson.Guidedinstructioninlogoprogrammingandthedevelopmentof cognitivemonitoringstrategiesamongcollegestudents.JournalofEducationalComputing Research,16:125–144,1997.
52. E. Lemke, H. Klausmeier, and C. Harris. Relationship of selected cognitive abilities to conceptattainmentandinformationprocessing.JournalofEducationalPsychology,58:27–
35,1967.
53. D.Lin,E.Dechter,K.Ellis,J.Tenenbaum,andS.H.Muggleton. Biasreformulationfor one-shotfunctioninduction. InProceedingsofthe23rdEuropeanConferenceonArtificial Intelligence,pages525–530,2014.
54. Z.Lipton. Themythosofmodelinterpretability. CommunicationsoftheACM,61:36–43,
2018.
55. F.Mansouri,Y.Chen,A.Vartanian,X.Zhu,andA.Singla. Preference-basedbatchand sequentialteaching:Towardsaunifiedviewofmodels.InAdvancesinNeuralInformation Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
2019.,pages9195–9205,2019.
56. J. McAuley and J. Leskovec. Hidden factors and hidden topics: Understanding rating dimensionswithreviewtext.InProceedingsofthe7thACMConferenceonRecommender Systems,page165–172,NewYork,NY,USA,2013.AssociationforComputingMachinery.
57. R.Michalski. Atheoryandmethodologyofinductivelearning. Machine Learning. Symbolic Computation,1983.
58. D. Michie. Experiments on the mechanization of game-learning. 2—rule-based learning andthehumanwindow. The Computer Journal,25:105–113,1982.
59. D.Michie. Machinelearninginthenextfiveyears. InProceedingsoftheThirdEuropean Working Session on Learning,pages107–122.Pitman,1988.
60. D. Michie. Machine intelligence and the human window. Applied Artificial Intelligence.,
5(1):1–10,1991.
61. G.A.Miller. Themagicalnumberseven,plusorminustwo:Somelimitsonourcapacity forprocessinginformation. The Psychological Review,63:81–97,1956.
62. T.Miller. Explanationinartificialintelligence:Insightsfromthesocialsciences. Artificial Intelligence,267:1–38,2019.
63. D. Minh, H. Wang, Y. Li, and T. N. Nguyen. Explainable artificial intelligence: a comprehensivereview. Artificial Intelligence Review,2021.
64. T.M.Mitchell. Generalizationassearch. Artificial Intelligence,18:203–226,1982.
65. S. Muggleton, D. Lin, and A. Tamaddoni-Nezhad. Meta-interpretive learning of higherorderdyadicdatalog:predicateinventionrevisited. Machine Learning,100:49–73,2015.
66. S. Muggleton, U. Schmid, C. Zeller, A. Tamaddoni-Nezhad, and T. Besold. Ultra-strong machine learning: comprehensibility of programs learned with ILP. Machine Learning,
107:1119–1140,2018.
67. S.H.Muggleton. Inductivelogicprogramming. New Gen. Comput.,8:295–318,1991.
68. B.B.Murdock. Theserialpositioneffectoffreerecall. JournalofExperimentalPsychology,64(5):482–488,1962.
69. A.Newell. Unified Theories of Cognition. HarvardUniversityPress,USA,1990.
70. L.NovickandK.Holyoak. Mathematicalproblemsolvingbyanalogy. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,17:398–415,1991.
71. J.W.Peirce,J.R.Gray,S.Simpson,M.R.MacAskill,R.Höchenberger,H.Sogo,E.Kastman,andJ.Lindeløv. Psychopy2:experimentsinbehaviormadeeasy. BehaviorResearch Methods,2019.
72. B. Poulin, R. Eisner, D. Szafron, P. Lu, R. Greiner, D. Wishart, A. Fyshe, B. Pearcy, C. Macdonell, and J. Anvik. Visual explanation of evidence with additive classifiers. In Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,volume2,2006.
73. A. N. Rafferty, E. Brunskill, T. L. Griffiths, and P. Shafto. Faster teaching via pomdp planning. Cognitive science,40:1290–1332,2016.
74. S. K. Reed, C. C. Ackinclose, and A. A. Voss. Selecting analogous problems: Similarity versusinclusiveness. Memory & Cognition 18(1),pages83–98,1990.
75. S.K.ReedandC.A.Bolstad.Useofexamplesandproceduresinproblemsolving.Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,17(4):753,1991.
Explanatorymachinelearningforsequentialhumanteaching 45
76. M. T. Ribeiro and C. Singh, S.and Guestrin. "why should I trust you?": Explaining the predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, page 1135–1144, New York, NY, USA,2016.AssociationforComputingMachinery.
77. M.T.Ribeiro,S.Singh,andC.Guestrin. Anchors:High-precisionmodel-agnosticexplanations. InProceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,2018.
78. C. Rudin. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions anduseinterpretablemodelsinstead. Nature Machine Intelligence,1:206–215,2019.
79. U.Schmid. Human-LikeMachineIntelligence.,chapterInteractiveLearningwithMutual ExplanationsinRelationalDomains. OxfordUniversityPress,2021.
80. U.SchmidandB.Finzel.Mutualexplanationsforcooperativedecisionmakinginmedicine. KI-Künstliche Intelligenz,34(2):227–233,2020.
81. U.SchmidandE.Kitzelmann. Inductiverulelearningontheknowledgelevel. Cognitive Systems Research,12:237–248,2011.
82. U.Schmid,C.Zeller,T.Besold,A.Tamaddoni-Nezhad,andS.Muggleton.Howdoespredicateinventionaffecthumancomprehensibility? InProceedings of the 26th International Conference on Inductive Logic Programming,pages52–67,2017.
83. C.A.Seger. Implicitlearning. Psychological bulletin,115(2):163,1994.
84. E.Y.Shapiro. Algorithmicprogramdebugging.acmdistinguisheddissertation,1982.
85. T.Sheridan.Human–robotinteraction:Statusandchallenges.HumanFactors,58(4):525–
532,2016.
86. H.A.SimonandJ.R.Hayes. Theunderstandingprocess:Problemisomorphs. Cognitive Psychology 8,pages165–190,1976.
87. C.Spearman. Theproofandmeasurementofassociationbetweentwothings. American Journal of Psychology,15(1),1904.
88. M.J.E.SternbergandS.H.Muggleton. Structureactivityrelationships(SAR)andpharmacophorediscoveryusinginductivelogicprogramming(ILP). QSARandCombinatorial Science,22(5):527–532,2003.
89. S. Stumpf, A. Bussone, and D. O’sullivan. Explanations considered harmful? user interactions with machine learning systems. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI),2016.
90. J.Sweller,P.A.Kirschner,andR.E.Clark. Whyminimallyguidedteachingtechniques donotwork:Areplytocommentaries. Educational Psychologist,42(2):115–121,2007.
91. P. Tamagnini, J. Krause, A. Dasgupta, and E. Bertini. Interpreting black-box classifiers usinginstance-levelvisualexplanations. InProceedings of the 2nd Workshop on HumanIn-the-Loop Data Analytics,NewYork,NY,USA,2017.AssociationforComputingMachinery.
92. K.Xu,J.Ba,R.Kiros,K.Cho,A.Courville,R.Salakhudinov,R.Zemel,andY.Bengio. Show, attend and tell: neural image caption generation with visual attention. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2048–2057,
2015.
93. T. Yeo, P. Kamalaruban, A. Singla, A. Merchant, T. Asselborn, L. Faucon, P. Dillenbourg, and V. Cevher. Iterative classroom teaching. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirty-First Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference and Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence,2019.
94. V.F.Zambaldi,D.C.Raposo,A.Santoro,V.Bapst,Y.Li,andI.e.a.Babuschkin. Deep reinforcementlearningwithrelationalinductivebiases. InICLR,2019.
95. C. Zeller and U. Schmid. Automatic generation of analogous problems to help resolving misconceptions in an intelligent tutor system for written subtraction. In Workshops Proceedings for the Twenty-fourth International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning, volume1815,pages108–117,2016.
96. X.Zhu.Machineteaching:Aninverseproblemtomachinelearningandanapproachtoward optimal education. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume29,2015.