OUP Synthetic Biology,2022,pp.1–8 doi: DOI HERE AdvanceAccessPublicationDate:DayMonthYear Paper PAPER Functional Synthetic Biology Ibrahim Aldulijan ,1 Jacob Beal ,2,∗ Sonja Billerbeck,3 Jeff Bouffard ,4 Ga¨el Chambonnier ,5 Nikolaos Delkis ,6 Isaac Guerreiro,7 Martin Holub,8 Paul Ross,9 Vinoo Selvarajah,7 Noah Sprent ,10 Gonzalo Vidal and Alejandro Vignoni 12
1SystemsEngineering,StevensInstituteofTechnology,1CastlePointTerrace,Hoboken,07030,NJ,USA,2IntelligentSoftware&Systems, RaytheonBBNTechnologies,10MoultonStreet,Cambridge,02138,MA,USA,3MolecularMicrobiology,GroningenBiomolecularSciences andBiotechnologyInstitute,UniversityofGroningen,Nijenborgh7,9747AG,Groningen,TheNetherlands,4CentreforAppliedSynthetic Biology,andDepartmentofBiology,ConcordiaUniversity,7141SherbrookeStreetWest,Montr´eal,H4B1R6,Qu´ebec,Canada,
5DepartmentofBiologicalEngineering,MassachusettsInstituteofTechnology,Cambridge,02139,Massachusetts,USA,6Plantand EnvironmentalBiotechnologyLaboratory,DepartmentofBiochemistryandBiotechnology,UniversityofThessaly,Viopolis,Mezourlo, Larissa,41500,Greece,7iGEMFoundation,45ProspectStreet,Cambridge,02139,MA,USA,8DelftUniversityofTechnology,Vander Maasweg9,2629HZ,TheNetherlands,9BioStratMarketing,9965HarbourLakeCircle,BoyntonBeach,FL,33437,USA,10Departmentof ChemicalEngineering,ImperialCollegeLondon,SouthKensingtonCampus,ExhibitionRoad,SW72AZ,UK,InterdisciplinaryComputing andComplexBioSystems(ICOS)researchgroup,SchoolofComputing,NewcastleUniversity,DevonshireBuilding,DevonshireTerrace, NE17RU,NewcastleUponTyne,UKand12SyntheticBiologyandBiosystemsControlLab,InstitutodeAutomaticaeInformatica Industrial,UniversitatPolitecnicadeValencia,CaminodeVeras/n,46022,Valencia,Spain
∗Correspondingauthor.jakebeal@ieee.org FORPUBLISHERONLYReceivedonDateMonthYear;revisedonDateMonthYear;acceptedonDateMonthYear Abstract Syntheticbiologistshavemadegreatprogressoverthepastdecadeindevelopingmethodsformodularassemblyofgenetic sequences and in engineering biological systems with a wide variety of functions in various contexts and organisms. However,currentparadigmsinthefieldentanglesequenceandfunctionalityinamannerthatmakesabstractiondifficult, reducesengineeringflexibility,andimpairspredictabilityanddesignreuse.FunctionalSyntheticBiologyaimstoovercome these impediments by focusing the design of biological systems on function, rather than on sequence. This reorientation will decouple the engineering of biological devices from the specifics of how those devices are put to use, requiring both conceptualandorganizationalchange,aswellassupportingsoftwaretooling.RealizingthisvisionofFunctionalSynthetic Biologywillallowmoreflexibilityinhowdevicesareused,moreopportunityforreuseofdevicesanddata,improvements in predictability, and reductions in technical risk and cost. Key words: Synthetic Biology; Engineering; Design; Reproducibility; Collaboration Introduction Despite this progress, significant challenges remain in the practice of synthetic biology at a systems level. Definitions Over the past decade, synthetic biologists have made great for parts and devices are typically unavailable, incomplete, or strides in the engineering of biological systems. One vision inconsistent. Likewise, little information is generally provided that has served as something of a roadmap is the model regarding interfaces, functionality, or host context, and such enunciated by Endy (11), a model comprising four levels of information is rarely available in a tool-friendly format. This increasing abstraction: DNA, Parts, Devices, and Systems. leadstosignificantdifficultyinsearchingforappropriateparts Consistent with this model, the field has developed a plethora or devices to use, in adapting parts and devices from their ofbasicpartssuchaspromoters,terminators,codingsequences, originalcontextforusewithinanewproject,andinpredicting and functional RNAs, which can be combined into composite the behavior of even the most basic systems from information DNA sequences through a variety of assembly methods (e.g., available about the components used to create them. These
(30; 14; 12; 32; 18)) or low-cost nucleic acid synthesis (6). At difficulties in turn lead to significant time requirements and higher levels of abstraction, the field has produced families of technicalrisktoachieveevenmodestengineeringgoals. biologicaldeviceswithavarietyofsensing,communication,or Under these conditions, engineering success can certainly computationalfunctions(e.g.,(5;16;23;13;33;8;28;17)),as be achieved, as illustrated by the many billions of dollars of well as methods for insulating devices from context (e.g., (20; industrial impact from synthetic biology, but it is slow and
22; 7)), and for characterizing and predicting their behavior costly to do so. On the other hand, if engineering could be
(e.g.,(10;27;3;9;23;31;8;28;17;2;1;25)). madesimpleandpredictable,evenjustforsystemscomprising
©TheAuthor2022.PublishedbyOxfordUniversityPress.Allrightsreserved.Forpermissions,pleasee-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
1
2202 luJ
1
]MQ.oib-q[
1v83500.7022:viXra
2 Aldulijan et al. System Device Part Composite Green Fluorescence Reporter Sense X GFP Green design build define select define interface implementation interface GFP wavelength atgcgtaaaggagaa... Function Sequence ecnecseroulf Design Build
5’cut CDS 3’cut defines Ex. Em. defines at higher level at higher level Fig. 1. Abstraction layers in a function-centric view: design focuses on biological functions, which are abstracted to produce devices by adding a descriptionofaninterface,predictedrangeofbehavior,andoperationalcontext.Devicesmaythenbecombinedtoproduceabiologicalsystem,whose functioninturnmaybeabstractedtocreateanewdeviceatahigherlevelofabstraction.Devicesmayhavemanydifferentoptionsforhowtheycanbe implementedwithparts,wherepartsaresequenceswithadefinedinterfaceforcombiningthemtobuildcompositesequences,whichalsomayinturn beabstractedintohigher-levelparts. smallnumbersofdevices,itwouldradicallylowercost,reduce Together, these approaches will allow the community of barriers to access, increase democratization, and unleash a synthetic biologists to more effectively share successes and wave of innovative applications of synthetic biology by small avoid failures. Below, we will expand on each of these three organizationstacklinglocalproblems. key goals—describing behavior, predictability and flexibility, Wecontendthattheprimarybarriertoachievingthisvision andriskreduction—andlayoutaroadmapforachievingthese is no longer biological, given the myriad advances that have goalsoverthecourseofthecomingdecade. been achieved. Rather, we argue that the problem is one of knowledge synthesis and organization: given the complexity of biological systems, no practitioner can be expected to even Function-Centric Design Descriptions be aware of all of the relevant parts, methods, and models, let alone have the detailed expertise in all of them to use Current practices and representations in synthetic biology are and combine them effectively in practice. How then can the mainly sequence-centric, meaning that the first-class objects advances and expertise dispersed across the synthetic biology of a design are sequences—typically DNA, though sometimes community be marshaled in order to enable practitioners to RNA or amino acids. Information about function is then effectivelyutilizethemintheirengineeringprojects? annotated as features or metadata used to describe the We propose that in order to meet this challenge, synthetic sequence.Manydesignrepresentations(e.g.,FASTA,GenBank, biology must be reoriented from its current sequence-centric GFF), reinforce this notion by providing no way of expressing approach to instead center on function. Specifically, a functional information without reference to a fully-specified FunctionalSyntheticBiologyapproachfocuseson: sequence. In practice, however, synthetic biologists tend to think
• descriptionsofbehavioroverdescriptionsofstructure, aboutdesignsmoreintermsoffunction.Consider,forexample,
• predictability and flexibility over optimization of function, greenfluorescentprotein(GFP)asareporteroftranscriptional and activity(lefthalfofFigure1).AtypicaluserofGFPdoesnot
• riskreductionovernovelty. think about the actual sequences and would be unlikely even torecognizeeitherthenucleicacidoraminoacidsequencesfor A focus on behavior means a biological component’s structure GFPiftheysawthem.Insteadtheyarelikelytothinkabouta
(i.e., genetic sequence) should be able to be changed and functional relationship between a coding sequence (CDS) that improvedwithoutdamagingthefunctionalityofasystemthat produces a GFP protein, which in turn will fluoresce with a includesit. Afocusonpredictabilitymeansidentifyingclasses predictable excitation and emission behavior. This is a fully of changes that are unlikely to damage functionality, and a coherentnotionofbiologicalfunction,independentofsequence, focusonflexibilitymeansvaluingthebreadthofsuchclassesof andisthetypicalsubjectofdiscussionsanddiagramsregarding changeswhendevelopingbiologicalcomponents.Afocusonrisk design. reductionmeansrecognizingthattherearemanyfailuremodes Also associated with the notion of function is a concept of that can impair the functionality of a biological system, and an interface to that function (e.g., embedding the GFP in a thatthereisvalueincapturingknowledgeaboutfailuremodes transcriptionalunitwhoseactivityistobereported)andofthe
(and how to avoid them) in the form of automation tools and typeofenvironmentswherethefunctionisexpectedtobehave machine-readablecomponentspecifications. aspredicted(e.g.,aerobicenvironmentswithrelativelyneutral pHacrossabroadrangeofcelltypes).ForFunctionalSynthetic
Functional Synthetic Biology 3 A) B) C) D) Cre Cas9 enzyme Drop-out genomic loxP loxP U6 ncRNA sgRNA target Fig.2.Otherexamplesoffunctionaldevices:A)anenzymethatcatalyzesthetransformationofonesmallmoleculechemicalintoanother,B)excision of a drop-out sequence using Cre recombinase targeting loxP sites, C) constitutive expression of non-coding RNA using a U6 promoter, and D) CRISPR-basedgeneeditingwithconstitutiveexpressionofCas9andsgRNA. Biology,then,wewilldefineadeviceasafunctionthathasbeen device or a composite system, is a matter of identifying an associatedwithadefinitionofaninterfaceandacontextforits appropriatepartorsequence,andtypicallytherearemanythat operation. This information is sufficient to combine a device couldpotentiallyapply. together with others to implement a biological system (e.g., With sequence-centric engineering, characterization of a to sense some condition and report it via green fluorescence). parthastendedtoaskquestionsoftheform“Howdoesthispart Finally,thefunctionofthatsystemmaybeitselfdescribedand behave?” Given a functional definition of a device, however, a possiblyabstractedintoahigher-leveldevicebyidentifyingits fundamentallydifferentquestionneedstobeanswered:“Isthis interfaceandcontextforoperation. part’sbehaviorgoodenoughtobeanimplementationforthat To actually implement a device or system, of course, a device?”Thisquestioncannotbeansweredwithoutconsidering specific sequence must be identified. Typically there are many what“goodenough”meansintermsofthefunctionofadevice. sequencesthatmaysufficetoimplementanygivendevice.GFP, For example, a Green Fluorescence Reporter device turns forexample,atthetimeofthiswritinghas160differentamino transcriptional activity into a strong fluorescent signal. How acid sequences on FPbase (19). Reverse translation of any of strongisstrongenough?Theanswerisdeterminedbythesignal these amino acid sequences further produces myriad distinct strength required to discriminate various levels of expression nucleic acid sequences, all of which encode the same amino from background with a given class of instrument (e.g., plate acid sequence. These alternatives are not identical, of course, reader or flow cytometer), which in turn determines the andlikelysomewillnotbefunctionalatall.Still,agreatmany flexibility of the specifications for the device instantiation, areexpectedtobesufficientlygoodimplementationsofaGreen i.e., what types and degrees of imperfections can be tolerated. FluorescenceReporterdevice. Devicecontextmustalsoberecordedinthespecification,asany As with devices, we often need to combine sequences GFPcodingsequencewillfailtoproducestrongfluorescenceif together with other sequences in order to form the composites itisplacedinthewrongoperationalcontext(e.g.,inanaerobic that implement systems, whether through assembly protocols conditions,withanincompatible5’UTR,orinanincompatible or by directly synthesizing the composite sequence. The right host). Useful device specifications thus require at least some half of Figure 1 shows this parallel abstraction hierarchy, in predictionsaboutdevicebehavior. whichapartisdefinedasasequencethathasbeenassociated There is an inherent tension and interplay between with a definition of a build interface, parts combine to form predictability and flexibility. Any device can be made composites, and those composites may in turn be abstracted impossible to realize by making its specification require too intohigher-levelparts. much precision and/or too great an operational range, e.g., Thisapproachtodefiningfunctionaldevicescanbeapplied lookingforaGreenFluorescenceReporterthatalwaysproduces toanywell-describedbiologicalfunction:Figure2showsother exactly the same number of molecules in wildly different cell examplesoffunctionaldevices,someofwhichwouldnecessarily types. Likewise, a device can be rendered inoperable if the needtobeimplementedusingmultipleparts. constraints placed on values are too lax (e.g., accepting a red Indeed,thisseparatedhierarchyisde factowhatisalready fluorescent protein as a legitimate implementation of a Green in informal use throughout much of the community. From Fluorescence Reporter) or if the operational range applied is whiteboards to journal articles, synthetic biologists typically too tightly constrained (e.g., predicting that the device will communicate in terms of function. Sequences, meanwhile, work only in the exact construct where it was characterized). are often selected arbitrarily or inherited from prior projects Success in designing and building engineered systems depends via a shared laboratory freezer, and in publications are on finding a middle ground where practitioners are readily typically relegated to supplementary information or even— able both to find devices and parts to realize a system and problematically—entirely omitted (24). Functional Synthetic also to predict the outcome that system will generate with a Biology proposes that we recognize this distinction and the satisfactorydegreeofreliabilityandaccuracy. separation between sequence and function, then explore its Thereislikewiseatensionbetweenthesegoalsandthedesire consequences in order to improve our representations, tooling, toobtainthebestperformancefromadevice. Forexample, in engineeringapproaches,andcollaborationstrategies. selectingaparttorealizeaGreenFluorescenceReporterdevice, it may be desirable to select a less bright GFP variant that is betterunderstood(thusmorepredictable),knowntooperatein awiderrangeoforganisms,oravailableinapreferredassembly Predictability and Flexibility format. Ultimately, this is a matter of trust and focus: the The importance of predictability and flexibility as design morethatapractitionercantrustthepredictabilityoftheless requirementsisheightenedwhenadevice’sfunctionaldefinition interesting parts of their system (e.g., the Green Fluorescence isdivorcedfromitsrealizationasacompositeofdiscreteparts. Reporter),themorethattheycanfocusontheirprimarygoals Implementation of a function, whether at the level of a single
4 Aldulijan et al.
1. Curate GFP 2. Publish
3. Use ntri b ute E. coli o C User 4. GFP contributions from 4. BioBrickE. coli Fluorescent atgcgtaaaggag... Reporters
5. Review MoCloS. cerevisiae atgcgtaacttcg...
7. Republish 8. Update
6. Improve GFP S. cerevisiae Fig.3.Decouplingfunctionandsequenceenablesthedevelopmentofacollaborativeecosystemfordistributing,using,andimprovingbiologicaldevices. Inthisvision,(1)anexpertcuratesadeviceandasetofpartsthatcanimplementthedevice,(2)thenpublishestheseinacollectionwheretheycan bediscoveredbyothersyntheticbiologists,(3)whoputthedevicetouseinvariouscontexts.Thosepractitionersmay(4)contributeback“patches” toimprovethedevice, e.g., improvedcharacterizationorcontexttoleranceinformation, (5)whicharethenreviewedbyeithertheoriginalexpertor othershelpingtomaintainthecollection.Theexpertsmayalso(6)improvethecollectioninotherways,e.g.,byimprovingthedesignofthepartsthat implementthedevice.Alloftheseimprovementsarethen(7)madeavailablewhenthecollectionisrepublishedasanewversion,and(8)thedevice usersreceivethebenefitsoftheseimprovementsbyupdatingtothenewestversion.
(e.g.,improvementofanovelmetabolitesensorwhoseactivity documentationthatcanusefullydescribethebehavior,context, isbeingreported). and constraints of a genetic object in the same way that Navigatingtherelationshipbetweenflexibility,predictability, otherengineeringdisciplinesseektodescribethespecifications and optimization of function is in general a challenging of a component. It also drives a need for characterization and unresolved problem in all engineering fields, and focused on improving the understanding of composability, particularly so for biology. Nevertheless, there are a number flexibility, predictability, and robustness. Explicitly studying of bioengineering tools, such as GFP, that are in common use and recording such information in a tool-friendly manner will precisely because they are reasonably effective at producing allow the information to be shared and redistributed more reasonablypredictablebehavioracrossafairlyflexiblerangeof broadly, and will allow practitioners to more readily benefit applicationsandoperatingconditions. Complementarily, there fromknowledgeandadvancesproducedbyothersinthefield. are operating conditions that are known to be unworkable, suchasusingGFPinananaerobicenvironment. Practitioners Collaborative Reduction of Technical Risk who have applied these tools have acquired a great deal of pragmatic knowledge about their range of flexibility and the Decoupling functional specifications and part sequences also conditions under which their behavior can be predicted. Some allowsnewapproachestocollaborationandinformationsharing ofthisaccumulatedknowledgehasfounditswayintoscientific that can reduce the risk of failure in engineering synthetic publications,butmuchofitisstillcommunicatedonlythrough biology systems. Here the key idea is that changes in parts informalchannelsandbywordofmouth. donotnecessarilyentailchangesindevicesorviceversa. FunctionalSyntheticBiologyproposesthatweshouldbegin Whenapartisimproved,thenewversionthatresultsmay capturing such knowledge in device specifications. Prior work still conform to the same device specifications that the old on predictive modeling (e.g., (27; 9; 23)) and reproducibility version satisfied, and thus be able to be substituted as an
(e.g., (2; 1; 25)) can provide initial information for some implementationforthatdevice.Forexample,aGFPpartmight common devices. Similar information can be captured for be codon optimized to produce the protein more efficiently, other devices by collecting it from experts and the literature or have a restriction site eliminated to make it compatible or by conducting similar studies. Such knowledge can then withawiderrangeofassemblymethods. Ifthenewversionof be applied, if desired, in optimization processes, particularly the part still satisfies the Green Fluorescence Reporter device multi-objectiveoptimizationthatcanassignvaluetoflexibility specification, then it can be safely predicted that systems
(e.g., (4)). Flexibility and predictability of devices may also using the old version can be upgraded to use the new version. be improved by applying methods for insulating devices from Likewise, a device may be improved with models that better context(e.g.,(20;22;7)). predict its interactions with other devices, or with better In sum, the focus on the functionality of a device rather documentationofitsexpectedoperationalrange,whilehaving than the sequence of a part reinforces the need for better noimpactonthesequenceofpartsthatimplementthedevice.
Functional Synthetic Biology 5 This decoupling offers a new means of capturing expert the collection. Those improvements might include expanding knowledge, in the form of curated collections of devices and or sharpening characterization, augmenting context tolerance the recommended parts to implement them. For example, a information,clarifyingdocumentation,orenhancingthedesign typical synthetic biologist should never need to consider the ofthepartsthatimplementthedevice.
160differentvariationsofGFPinFPbase,letaloneothergreen Distributed version control can make it easy for users to proteins like ZsGreen or mNeonGreen. Instead, they should contribute their improvements back as suggested changes to be able to determine their intended operating range (e.g., E. the collection. Agile software tooling can support the curation coli DH5α in M9 media at 30 ◦C to 37 ◦C), select a Green ofsuchcontributions,makingitsimpletothemaintainersofa Fluorescence Reporter device that operates in that range, and collectiontoreviewanddiscussacontribution,requestchanges then implement it with any of the parts that are currently whereneeded,andapplyautomation-assistedvalidationchecks recommended by experts as a good implementation for that for quality control. Once incorporated, improvements can be device. takenupinanewversionofthecollectionthatismadeavailable If better parts become available or a problem is detected tothecommunitywhenthecollectionisrepublished.Userscan with one of the current parts, then all that needs to be thentakeadvantageofthebenefitsthesecuratedimprovements changed is the recommendation. As long as the functional provide simply by updating their copy of the collection to the characteristicsofthenewlyrecommendedpartcanbeassessed latestversion. to remain within the range of predictability that has been When implemented well, the transparency and checking in established for the Green Fluorescence Reporter device, any such processes can help build trust within a community of systemusingthedeviceshouldbeabletobesafelyupdatedto users and maintainers. The mechanisms of distributed version usethenewpart.Indeed,suchanupgraderecommendationcan controlalsohelptosustainanopenmarketplaceforcompetition alreadybefoundinthescientificliteratureforredfluorescence, betweenpackagesofinformationandtheirattendantprocesses when the developers of mCherry suggested phasing out and maintainers. Just as in the software world, Functional its predecessor, mRFP1, given mCherry’s improved “higher Synthetic Biology packages will compete not just on the basis extinction coefficient ..., tolerance of N-terminal fusions and of technical efficacy, but also their trustworthiness, reliability, photostability.”(29) easeofuse,andresponsivenesstouserneeds. Assessing the potential impact from a change to a part or device, however, is often not clear-cut or straightforward. If a model is not sufficiently accurate, there is a risk that changes A Roadmap to Functional Synthetic Biology assessed as safe will instead produce unwanted side-effects or even result in a system-wide degradation. This risk from In this section, we propose a multi-year roadmap for realizing adoptingarecommendation,however,mustbebalancedagainst thevisionforFunctionalSyntheticBiologysetoutabove.This the risk and costs associated with ignoring a recommendation roadmap foregrounds the vision’s most consequential aspects from experts who are likely to be more familiar with the andspecifiesthetimeframeswithinwhichwepredictthatthese specialized matter at hand and better able to sort through aspectscanreasonablybeachieved(Figure4). themyriadpossibleimplementationsofthedevice.Ultimately, Some aspects of the vision that the roadmap accounts for then, this is a question of building trust around changes to are well-defined and can be achieved with technologies and complexsystemswithimplicationsthataredifficulttopredict. techniques that are available today. They simply need to be Thesoftwareengineeringcommunityhasfacedaverysimilar adaptedandapplied.Forexample,anintegratedrepresentation problem of managing technical risk and building trust around of the part and device hierarchies from Figure 1 can already changes with difficult-to-predict systems implications. That be implemented using the SBOL 2 (26) or SBOL 3 (21) community has addressed its analogous challenge with a now- standards. Alternatively, devices could also be represented mature ecosystem of tools and collaborative processes (often withamodelinglanguagesuchasSBML(15), thenassociated collected under the name “agile software development”) for with parts represented in GenBank or GFF. In either case, a managingthedevelopmentofcomplexsystems. modern version control system such as git can be employed Foundational to these processes are distributed version to manage and disseminate the genetic design files generated. control systems (e.g., git) that afford communities of experts Another advantage of such a version control system is that a convenient way to organize, share, and maintain packages it supports mature agile software workflows (e.g., trunk-based of information. These are already used in the bioinformatic development) and tooling (e.g., continuous integration) that community to manage knowledge collections such as the fostercollaborationandenablequalitycontrolautomation. Systems Biology Ontology (SBO), Sequence Ontology (SO), Short term targets for development include basic parts andGeneOntology(GO). such as constitutive promoters, terminators, sensors, and Functional Synthetic Biology can take advantage of reporters, as well as regulatory insulation (e.g., (20; 22; 7)) these same mechanisms to curate collections of devices, and families of transcriptional computing devices (e.g., (5; collaborativelymaintainthem,andreducetechnicalriskrelated 16; 23; 13; 8)). Developing a collection of design packages to updating these collections. Figure 3 illustrates the type of coveringtheseelements,alongwithfunction-centricdesignand interactions that can be enabled. In this vision, an expert build tools, should enable routine engineering of 2-3 device curatesadevicesuchasaGreenFluorescenceReporter,along sense/compute/actuate circuits in model microbes and cellwith options for implementing the device using one of several free systems. The core packages that result from these initial parts containing a coding sequence for GFP. This device is engineeringinitiativescanbemadeavailablethroughacentral aggregated with others into a fluorescent reporters collection, repository serving as a rendezvous point for early adopters to which can be published as a package in a catalog where it can discoverandmakeuseofthesepackages. besharedwithothersyntheticbiologists. As this Functional Synthetic Biology ecosystem matures In the course of applying the device in various contexts, and expands, practitioners will undoubtedly enhance the synthetic biologists will undoubtedly identify ways to improve performance, flexibility, and reliability of the parts, will add
6 Aldulijan et al. Immediate (1 -2 years) Short Term (2 -4 years) Medium Term (3 -5 years) Long Term (5 -10 years) Version control of biological designs Software Function-centric design and build tools Genetic design packages Automation of part selection Support Central package repository Device representation in SBOL3 Predictability Agile biological design workflows Devices operate in multiple organisms Device insulation from 5’/3’ context Broad context devices
& Flexibility Automated part & device quality control Characterization of context & usability Scope of Routine creation of 2-3 device systems Routine creation of 4-6 device systems Routine creation of 10+device systems Systems Operation in model microbes & cell-free Operation in non-model microbes Operation in multicellular organisms Adoption Core packages used by early adopters Communities share data via packages Broad adoption of Functional SynBio Fig.4.Suggestedroadmapofgoals,fromimmediatetolong-term,forachievingFunctionalSyntheticBiology. new packages focused on their own areas of interest, and sequencesthatdefinesthefieldtodaytoafocusonfunctionality will expand the functionality of existing packages by making thatwilltransformthewaysyntheticbiologyispracticedinthe incrementalupgradestothem.Thecomplexityofsystemsthat future.Thisrepresentsacriticalstepforwardalongthepathto can be routinely engineered will increase, as will levels of achievingsystemslevelengineering,withimprovementsindata automation. sharing leading to increases in flexibility and predictability, The ability to support more effective sharing of data will whichinturnopenupopportunitiesforenhancedcollaboration then facilitate better understanding and characterization of anddissemination.Itisourhopethatthispaperwillencourage operational context, expansion into non-model microbes, and others to build on the framework presented, to join us on our thecreationofmorecontext-agnosticdevicesthatcanoperate journey to transform the practice of synthetic biology using effectivelyinmultipletypesoforganisms.Overthelongerterm, theroadmapwehavelaidoutasaguide,andtohelpmobilize we anticipate a widespread adoption of Functional Synthetic the resources that will be required to bring that journey to a Biology, driven by the standardization of complex biological successfulconclusion. system engineering, the development of extremely flexible devices, and extension even to effective operation in vivo in Competing interests complexmulticellularorganisms. Following this roadmap will also require dealing with Nocompetinginterestisdeclared. non-technical challenges regarding incentives. For example, an initial investment in time and resources is needed from experienced practitioners before the community can benefit, Material Availability Statement and the people investing will not necessarily be the ones Notapplicable. who most benefit. Given the struggle to even obtain DNA sequence information from scientific publications (24), we can expectthatcurrentacademicincentiveswillnotbesufficienton Data Availability Statement their own to motivate widespread investment in the curation and publication of functional information. There will also be Notapplicable. questions around governance and degree of centralization for the evolving collection of functional packages. Finally, there Author contributions statement is an important collective action problem to be solved if the community wishes resources to be available under free and All authors contributed to conceptualization, writing the open licenses, as opposed to needing to pay for access to this originaldraft,andreviewandediting. information. Funding Conclusions This work was supported in part by the following funding Many practitioners of synthetic biology recognize the impact sources:J.Be.wassupportedbyAirForceResearchLaboratory thatstandardizingsystems-levelengineeringcouldhaveonthe (AFRL) and DARPA contract FA8750-17-C-0184. J.Bo. developmentofbiologicalsystemsandareeagertoexploitthe was supported by a Horizon Postdoctoral Fellowship from potentialithastodemocratizeaccesstocomplexbiotechnology Concordia University. M.H. was supported by funding from andeffecttransformativechangeinabroadrangeofsectorsand the ERC Advanced Grant LoopingDNA (no. 883684). N.S. application areas such as healthcare, manufacturing, energy, was supported by funding from the BBSRC under award agriculture,andenvironmentalsustainability. BB/M011178/1.G.V.wassupportedbyascholarshipfromthe To date, however, realizing that potential has proven School of Computing, Newcastle University. A.V. was funded elusive, in large part because the information required by Grant MINECO/AEI, EU DPI2017-82896-C2-1-R and for effectively engineering with biological parts and devices MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 grant number PID2020has been inaccessible, insufficient or incomplete. The 117271RB-C21. Functional Synthetic Biology framework presented here lays Thisdocumentdoesnotcontaintechnologyortechnicaldata the groundwork for a shift in orientation from the focus on controlled under either the U.S. International Traffic in Arms
Functional Synthetic Biology 7 Regulations or the U.S. Export Administration Regulations. 14.Daniel G Gibson, Lei Young, Ray-Yuan Chuang, J Craig Views, opinions, and/or findings expressed are those of the Venter, Clyde A Hutchison, and Hamilton O Smith. author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the Enzymaticassemblyofdnamoleculesuptoseveralhundred official views or policies of the Department of Defense or the kilobases. Nature methods,6(5):343–345,2009. U.S.Government. 15.M. Hucka, A. Finney, H. M. Sauro, H. Bolouri, J. C. Doyle, H. Kitano, A. P. Arkin, B. J. Bornstein, D. Bray, A.Cornish-Bowden,A.A.Cuellar,S.Dronov,E.D.Gilles, M. Ginkel, V. Gor, I. I. Goryanin, W. J. Hedley, T. C. References Hodgman, J.-H. Hofmeyr, P. J. Hunter, N. S. Juty, J. L. Kasberger, A.Kremling, U.Kummer, N.LeNovere, L.M.
1. Jacob Beal, Natalie G Farny, Traci Haddock-Angelli, Loew, D. Lucio, P. Mendes, E. Minch, E. D. Mjolsness, VinooSelvarajah,GeoffSBaldwin,RussellBuckley-Taylor, Y. Nakayama, M. R. Nelson, P. F. Nielsen, T. Sakurada, Markus Gershater, Daisuke Kiga, John Marken, Vishal J. C. Schaff, B. E. Shapiro, T. S. Shimizu, H. D. Spence, Sanchania, et al. Robust estimation of bacterial cell count J.Stelling,K.Takahashi,M.Tomita,J.Wagner,J.Wang, from optical density. Communications biology, 3(1):1–29, and the rest of the SBML Forum. The systems biology
2020. markuplanguage(SBML):amediumforrepresentationand
2. JacobBeal,TraciHaddock-Angelli,GeoffBaldwin,Markus exchange of biochemical network models. Bioinformatics, Gershater, Ari Dwijayanti, Marko Storch, Kim De Mora, 19(4):524–531,mar2003. Meagan Lizarazo, Randy Rettberg, and with the iGEM 16.Samira Kiani, Jacob Beal, Mohammad R Ebrahimkhani, Interlab Study Contributors. Quantification of bacterial Jin Huh, Richard N Hall, Zhen Xie, Yinqing Li, and Ron fluorescence using independent calibrants. PloS one, Weiss. Crisprtranscriptionalrepressiondevicesandlayered
13(6):e0199432,2018. circuits in mammalian cells. Nature methods, 11(7):723–
3. Jacob Beal, Tyler E Wagner, Tasuku Kitada, Odisse 726,2014. Azizgolshani, Jordan Moberg Parker, Douglas Densmore, 17.Katherine A. Kiwimagi, Justin H. Letendre, Benjamin H. and Ron Weiss. Model-driven engineering of gene Weinberg, Junmin Wang, Mingzhe Chen, Leandro expression from rna replicons. ACS synthetic biology, Watanabe, Chris J. Myers, Jacob Beal, Wilson W.
4(1):48–56,2015. Wong, and Ron Weiss. Quantitative characterization of
4. Yadira Boada, Gilberto Reynoso-Meza, Jesu´s Pic´o, and recombinases-based digitizer circuits enables predictable AlejandroVignoni.Multi-objectiveoptimizationframework amplification of biological signals. Communications to obtain model-based guidelines for tuning biological Biology,2021. syntheticdevices:anadaptivenetworkcase. BMCsystems 18.Stefan de Kok, Leslie H Stanton, Todd Slaby, Maxime biology,10(1):1–19,2016. Durot, Victor F Holmes, Kedar G Patel, Darren Platt,
5. Jerome Bonnet, Pakpoom Subsoontorn, and Drew Endy. Elaine B Shapland, Zach Serber, Jed Dean, et al. Rapid Rewritable digital data storage in live cells via engineered andreliablednaassemblyvialigasecyclingreaction. ACS control of recombination directionality. Proceedings of the synthetic biology,3(2):97–106,2014. National Academy of Sciences, 109(23):8884–8889, Jun 19.Talley J Lambert. FPbase: a community-editable
2012. fluorescent protein database. Nature methods, 16(4):277–
6. RobertH.Carlson. Biology Is Technology : The Promise, 278,2019. Peril, and New Business of Engineering Life. Harvard 20.Chunbo Lou, Brynne Stanton, Ying-Ja Chen, Brian UniversityPress,2011. Munsky, and Christopher A Voigt. Ribozyme-based
7. Swati B Carr, Jacob Beal, and Douglas M Densmore. insulator parts buffer synthetic circuits from genetic Reducing dna context dependence in bacterial promoters. context. Nature biotechnology,30(11):1137–1142,2012. PloS one,12(4):e0176013,2017. 21.James Alastair McLaughlin, Jacob Beal, Go¨ksel Mısırlı,
8. Ye Chen, Shuyi Zhang, Eric M Young, Timothy S Jones, Raik Gru¨nberg, Bryan A Bartley, James Scott-Brown, Douglas Densmore, and Christopher A Voigt. Genetic Prashant Vaidyanathan, Pedro Fontanarrosa, Ernst circuit design automation for yeast. Nature Microbiology, Oberortner, Anil Wipat, et al. The synthetic biology
5(11):1349–1360,2020. open language (sbol) version 3: simplified data exchange
9. Noah Davidsohn, Jacob Beal, Samira Kiani, Aaron Adler, for bioengineering. Frontiers in Bioengineering and Fusun Yaman, Yinqing Li, Zhen Xie, and Ron Weiss. Biotechnology,page1009,2020. Accurate predictions of genetic circuit behavior from part 22.VivekKMutalik, JoaoCGuimaraes, GuillaumeCambray, characterization and modular composition. ACS synthetic Colin Lam, Marc Juul Christoffersen, Quynh-Anh Mai, biology,4(6):673–681,2015. Andrew B Tran, Morgan Paull, Jay D Keasling, Adam P
10.Domitilla Del Vecchio, Alexander J Ninfa, and Eduardo D Arkin, et al. Precise and reliable gene expression via Sontag. Modular cell biology: retroactivity and insulation. standard transcription and translation initiation elements. Molecular systems biology,4(1):161,2008. Nature methods,10(4):354–360,2013.
11.Drew Endy. Foundations for engineering biology. Nature, 23.Alec AK Nielsen, Bryan S Der, Jonghyeon Shin, Prashant
438(7067):449–453,November2005. Vaidyanathan, Vanya Paralanov, Elizabeth A Strychalski,
12.Carola Engler, Romy Kandzia, and Sylvestre Marillonnet. David Ross, Douglas Densmore, and Christopher A Voigt. A one pot, one step, precision cloning method with high Genetic circuit design automation. Science, 352(6281), throughputcapability. PloS one,3(11):e3647,jan2008. 2016.
13.MilesWGander,JustinDVrana,WilliamEVoje,JamesM 24.JeanPeccoud,JChristopherAnderson,DeepakChandran, Carothers, and Eric Klavins. Digital logic circuits in Douglas Densmore, Michal Galdzicki, Matthew W Lux, yeastwithcrispr-dcas9norgates. Naturecommunications, CesarARodriguez,Guy-BartStan,andHerbertMSauro.
8(1):1–11,2017. Essential information for synthetic dna sequences. Nature
8 Aldulijan et al. biotechnology,29(1):22–22,2011. proteinsderivedfromdiscosomasp.redfluorescentprotein.
25.P Scott Pine, Sarah A Munro, Jerod R Parsons, Jennifer Nature biotechnology,22(12):1567–1572,2004. McDaniel,AnneBergstromLucas,JeanLozach,TimothyG 30.Reshma Shetty, Meagan Lizarazo, Randy Rettberg, and Myers, Qin Su, Sarah M Jacobs-Helber, and Marc Salit. ThomasFKnight.Assemblyofbiobrickstandardbiological Evaluation of the external rna controls consortium (ercc) parts using three antibiotic assembly. In Methods in reference material using a modified latin square design. enzymology,volume498,pages311–326.Elsevier,2011. BMC biotechnology,16(1):1–15,2016. 31.Junmin Wang, Samuel A Isaacson, and Calin Belta.
26.Nicholas Roehner, Jacob Beal, Kevin Clancy, Bryan Modelinggeneticcircuitbehaviorintransientlytransfected Bartley, Goksel Misirli, Raik Gru¨nberg, Ernst Oberortner, mammalian cells. ACS synthetic biology, 8(4):697–707, Matthew Pocock, Michael Bissell, Curtis Madsen, et al. 2019. Sharing structure and function in biological design with 32.Ernst Weber, Carola Engler, Ramona Gruetzner, Stefan SBOL2.0. ACS synthetic biology,5(6):498–506,2016. Werner, and Sylvestre Marillonnet. A modular cloning
27.Howard M Salis, Ethan A Mirsky, and Christopher A system for standardized assembly of multigene constructs. Voigt. Automated design of synthetic ribosome binding PloS one,6(2):e16765,2011. sites to control protein expression. Nature Biotechnology, 33.Benjamin H Weinberg, Jang Hwan Cho, Yash Agarwal,
27(10):946–950,2009. NT Hang Pham, Leidy D Caraballo, Maciej Walkosz,
28.John T Sexton and Jeffrey J Tabor. Multiplexing cell-cell Charina Ortega, Micaela Trexler, Nathan Tague, Billy communication. Molecular systems biology, 16(7):e9618, Law, et al. High-performance chemical-and light-inducible
2020. recombinases in mammalian cells and mice. Nature
29.Nathan C Shaner, Robert E Campbell, Paul A Steinbach, communications,10(1):1–10,2019. Ben NG Giepmans, Amy E Palmer, and Roger Y Tsien. Improved monomeric red, orange and yellow fluorescent